arXiv:physics/0003068v1 [physics.chem-ph] 24 Mar 2000

Phase changes in 38 atom Lennard-Jones clusters. I: A parallel
tempering study in the canonical ensemble
J. P. Neirotti
Department of Chemistry, University of Rhode Island
51 Lower College Road, Kingston, RI 02881-0809

F. Calvo
D´epartement de Recherche sur la Mati`ere Condens´ee
Service des Ions, Atomes et Agr´egats
CEA Grenoble
F38054 Grenoble Cedex, France

David L. Freeman
Department of Chemistry, University of Rhode Island
51 Lower College Road, Kingston, RI 02881-0809
and
J. D. Doll
Department of Chemistry, Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
(January 14, 2014)

Abstract
The heat capacity and isomer distributions of the 38 atom Lennard-Jones
cluster have been calculated in the canonical ensemble using parallel tempering Monte Carlo methods. A distinct region of temperature is identified that
corresponds to equilibrium between the global minimum structure and the

icosahedral basin of structures. This region of temperatures occurs below the
melting peak of the heat capacity and is accompanied by a peak in the derivative of the heat capacity with temperature. Parallel tempering is shown to
introduce correlations between results at different temperatures. A discussion
is given that compares parallel tempering with other related approaches that
ensure ergodic simulations.

Typeset using REVTEX

I. INTRODUCTION

Because the properties of molecular aggregates impact diverse areas ranging from nucleation and condensation1 to heterogeneous catalysis, the study of clusters has continued
to be an important part of modern condensed matter science. Clusters can be viewed as
an intermediate phase of matter, and clusters can provide information about the transformation from finite to bulk behavior. Furthermore, the potential surfaces of clusters can be
complex, and many clusters are useful prototypes for studying other systems having complex
phenomenology.
The properties of small clusters can be unusual owing to the dominance of surface rather
than bulk atoms. A particularly important and well studied example of a property that
owes its behavior to the presence of large numbers of surface atoms is cluster structure.2–4
The structure of clusters can differ significantly from the structure of the corresponding
bulk material, and these differences in structure have implications about the properties of
the clusters. For example, most small Lennard-Jones (LJ) clusters have global potential
surface minima that are based on icosahedral growth patterns. The five-fold symmetries
of these clusters differ substantially from the closest-packed arrangements observed in bulk
materials.
While most small Lennard-Jones clusters have geometries based on icosahedral core
structures, there can be exceptions.2,5–7 A notable example is the 38-atom Lennard-Jones
cluster [LJ38 ]. This cluster is particularly interesting owing to its complex potential surface
and associated phenomenology. The potential surface for LJ38 has been described in detail
by Doye, Miller and Wales5 who have carefully constructed the disconnectivity graph8,9 for
the system using information garnered from basin hopping and eigenvector following studies
of the low energy potential minima along with examinations of the transition state barriers.
The general structure of this potential surface can be imagined to be two basins of similar
energies separated by a large energy barrier with the lowest energy basin being significantly
narrower than the second basin. Striking is the global minimum energy structure for LJ38

which, unlike the case for most small Lennard-Jones clusters, is not based on an icosahedral
core, but rather is a symmetric truncated octahedron. The vertices defined by the surface
atoms of LJ38 have a morphology identical to the first Brillouin zone of a face centered
cubic lattice,10 and the high symmetry of the cluster may account for its stability. It is
interesting to note that recent experimental studies11 of nickel clusters using nitrogen uptake
measurements have found the global minimum of Ni38 to be a truncated octahedron as well.
The basin of energy minima about the global minimum of LJ38 is narrow compared to
the basin about the next highest energy isomer which does have an icosahedral core. The
difference in energy between the global minimum and the lowest minimum in the icosahedral
basin is only 0.38% of the energy of the global minimum.5
Characteristic of some thermodynamic properties of small clusters are ranges of temperature over which these properties change rapidly in a fashion reminiscent of the divergent
behavior known to occur in bulk phase transitions at a single temperature. The rapid
changes in such thermodynamic properties for clusters are not divergent and occur over a
range of temperatures owing to the finite sizes of the systems. In accord with the usage
introduced by Berry, Beck, Davis and Jellinek12 we refer to the temperature ranges where
rapid changes occur as “phase change” regions, rather than using the term “phase transition,” that is reserved for systems at the thermodynamic limit. As an example LJ55 displays
a heat capacity anomaly over a range in temperatures often associated with what has been
termed “cluster melting.”13 Molecular dynamics and microcanonical simulations performed
at kinetic temperatures in the melting region of LJ55 exhibit van der Waals type loops in
the caloric curves and coexistence between solid-like and liquid-like forms.
In recent studies, Doye, Wales and Miller14 and Miller, Doye and Wales15 have examined
the phase change behavior of LJ38 . These authors have calculated the heat capacity and
isomer distributions as a function of temperature using the superposition method.16,17 In the
superposition method the microcanonical density of states is calculated for each potential
minimum, and the total density of states is then constructed by summation with respect
to each local density of states. Because it is not possible to find all potential minima for

a system as complex as LJ38 , the summation is augmented with factors that represent the
effective weights of the potential minima that are included in the sum. The superposition
method has also been improved to account for anharmonicities and stationary points.17 For
LJ38 Doye et al.14 have identified two phase change regions. The first, accompanied by a heat
capacity maximum, is associated with a solid-to-solid phase change between the truncated
octahedral basin and the icosahedral basin. A higher temperature heat capacity anomaly
represents the solid-liquid coexistence region, similar to that found in other cluster systems.
The heat capacity anomaly associated with the melting transition in LJ38 is steeper and more
pronounced than the heat capacity peak that Doye et al.14 have associated with the solidsolid transition. Because the weights that enter in the sum to construct the microcanonical
density of states are estimated, it is important to confirm the findings of Doye et al.14 by
detailed numerical simulation. Such simulations are a goal of the current work and its
companion paper. As is found in Section III, the simulations provide a heat capacity curve
for LJ38 that has some qualitative differences with the curve reported by Doye et al.14
Owing to the complex structure of the potential surface of LJ38 , the system represents
a particularly challenging case for simulation. It is well known that simulations of systems
having more than one important region of space separated by significant energy barriers can
be difficult. The difficulties are particularly severe if any of the regions are either narrow
or reachable only via narrow channels. The narrow basin about the global minimum makes
simulations of LJ38 especially difficult. There are several methods that have been developed
that can prove to be useful in overcoming such ergodicity difficulties in simulations. Many of
these methods use information about the underlying potential surface generated from simulations on the system using parameters where the various regions of configuration space are
well-connected. One of the earliest of these methods is J-walking18 where information about
the potential surface is obtained from simulations at high temperatures, and the information
is passed to low temperature walks by jumping periodically to the high temperature walk.
Closely allied with J-walking is the parallel tempering method19–23 where configurations are
exchanged between walkers running at two differing temperatures. A related approach,24

similar in spirit to J-walking, uses Tsallis distributions that are sufficiently broad to cover
much of configuration space. Another recent addition25 to these methods is the use of multicanonical distributions26 in the jumping process. Multicanonical walks are performed using
the entropy of the system, and multicanonical distributions are nearly independent of the
energy thereby allowing easy transitions between energy basins. As we discuss in the current work, we have found the parallel tempering method to be most useful in the context
of simulations of LJ38 . A comparative discussion of some of the methods outlined above is
given later in this paper.
In the current work we apply parallel tempering to the calculation of the thermodynamic
properties of LJ38 in the canonical ensemble. In the paper that follows27 we again use parallel
tempering to study LJ38 , but using molecular dynamics methods along with microcanonical
Monte Carlo simulations. Our goals are to understand better this complex system and to
determine the best simulation method for systems of comparable complexity. The contents
of the remainder of this first paper are as follows. In Section II we discuss the methods
used with particular emphasis on the parallel tempering approach and its relation to the
J-walking method. In Section III we present the results including the heat capacity as a
function of temperature and identify the phase change behaviors of LJ38 . In Section IV we
present our conclusions and describe our experiences with alternatives to parallel tempering
for insuring ergodicity.

II. METHOD

For canonical simulations we model a cluster with N atoms by the standard LennardJones potential augmented by a constraining potential Uc used to define the cluster
N



σ

U(r) = 4ε
rij
i<j

12

σ
−
rij

6



 + Uc ,

(1)

where σ and ε are respectively the standard Lennard-Jones length and energy parameters,
and rij is the distance between particles i and j. The constraining potential is necessary

because clusters at defined temperatures have finite vapor pressures, and the evaporation
events can make the association of any atom with the cluster ambiguous. For classical Monte
Carlo simulations, a perfectly reflecting constraining potential is most convenient
N

Uc =

u(ri),

(2)

i=1

with
u(r) =









∞ |r − rcm | > Rc
0

(3)

|r − rcm | < Rc

where rcm is the center of mass of the cluster, and we call Rc the constraining radius.
Thermodynamic properties of the system are calculated with Monte Carlo methods using
the parallel tempering technique.19–23 To understand the application of the parallel tempering method and to understand the comparison of parallel tempering with other related
methods, it is useful to review the basic principles of Monte Carlo simulations.
In the canonical ensemble the goal is the calculation of canonical expectation values. For
example, the average potential energy is expressed
d3N r U(r)e−βU (r)
,
d3N r e−βU (r)

U =

(4)

where β = 1/kB T with T the temperature and kB the Boltzmann constant. In Monte
Carlo simulations such canonical averages are determined by executing a random walk in
configuration space so that the walker visits points in space with a probability proportional
to the canonical density ρ(r) = Z −1 exp[−βU(r)], where Z is the configurational integral
that normalizes the density. After generating M such configurations in a random walk, the
expectation value of the potential energy is approximated by
U

M

The approximate expectation value U

1
=
M
M

M

U(ri ).

(5)

i=1

becomes exact in the limit that M → ∞.

A sufficiency condition for the random walk to visit configuration space with a probability
proportional to the density ρ(r) is the detailed balance condition28,29

ρ(ro )K(ro → rn ) = ρ(rn )K(rn → ro ),

(6)

where ro and rn represent two configurations of the system and K(ro → rn ) is the conditional
probability that if the system is at configuration ro it makes a transition to rn . In many
Monte Carlo approaches, the conditional probability is not known and is replaced by the
expression
K(ro → rn ) = T (ro → rn ) acc(ro → rn ),

(7)

where T (ro → rn ) is called the trial probability and acc(ro → rn ) is an acceptance probability constructed to ensure K(ro → rn ) satisfies the detailed balance condition. The trial
probability can be any normalized density function chosen for convenience. A common
choice for the acceptance probability is given by28,29
acc(ro → rn ) = min 1,

ρ(rn )T (rn → ro )
.
ρ(ro )T (ro → rn )

(8)

The Metropolis method,30 obtained from Eq.(8) by choosing T (ro → rn ) to be a uniform
distribution of points of width ∆ centered about ro , is arguably the most widely used Monte
Carlo method and the basis for all the approaches discussed in the current work. The
Metropolis method rigorously guarantees a random walk visits configuration space proportional to a given density function asymptotically in the limit of an infinite number of steps.
In practice when configuration space is divided into important regions separated by significant energy barriers, a low temperature finite Metropolis walk can have prohibitively long
equilibration times.
Such problems in attaining ergodicity in the walk do not occur at temperatures sufficiently high that the system has significant probability of finding itself in the barrier regions.
In both the J-walking and parallel tempering methods, information obtained from an ergodic
Metropolis walk at high temperatures is passed to a low temperature walker periodically to
enable the low temperature walker to overcome the barriers between separated regions. In
the J-walking method18 the trial probability at inverse temperature β is taken to be a high
temperature Boltzmann distribution

T (ro → rn ) = Z −1 e−βJ U (rn )

(9)

where βJ represents the jumping temperature that is sufficiently high that a Metropolis walk
can be assumed to be ergodic. Introduction of Eq.(9) into Eq.(8) results in the acceptance
probability
acc(ro → rn ) = min {1, exp[−(β − βJ )(U(rn ) − U(ro ))]} .

(10)

In practice at inverse temperature β the trial moves are taken from the Metropolis distribution about 90% of the time with jumps attempted using Eq.(9) about 10% of the time.
The jumping configurations are generated with a Metropolis walk at inverse temperature
βJ , and jump attempts are accepted using Eq.(10). The acceptance expression [Eq.(10)]
is correct provided the configurations chosen for jumping are a random representation of
the distribution e−βJ U (r) . The Metropolis walk that is used to generate the configurations
at inverse temperature βJ is correlated,28 and Eq.(10) is inappropriate unless jumps are
attempted sufficiently infrequently to break the correlations. In practice Metropolis walks
are still correlated after 10 steps, and it is not possible to use Eq.(10) correctly if jumps
are attempted 10% of the time. In J-walking the difficulty with correlations is overcome in
two ways. In the first method, often called serial J-walking,18 a large set of configurations is
stored to an external distribution with the configurations generated with a Metropolis walk
at inverse temperature βJ , and configurations stored only after sufficient steps to break the
correlations in the Metropolis walk. Additionally, the configurations are chosen from the
external distribution at random. This external distribution is made sufficiently large that
the probability of ever choosing the same configuration more than once is small. In this
method detailed balance is strictly satisfied only in the limit that the external distribution
is of infinite size. In the second method, often called parallel J-walking,31,32 the walks at
each temperature are made in tandem on a parallel machine. Many processors, randomly
initialized, are assigned to the jumping temperature, and each processor at the jumping
temperature is used to donate a high temperature configuration to the low temperature

walk sufficiently infrequently that the correlations in the Metropolis walk at inverse temperature βJ are broken. In this parallel method, configurations are never reused, but the
acceptance criterion [Eq.(10)] is strictly valid only in the limit of an infinite set of processors
at inverse temperature βJ . In practice both serial and parallel J-walking work well for many
applications with finite external distributions or with a finite set of processors.18,31–38
In parallel tempering19–23 configurations from a high temperature walk are also used
to make a low temperature walk ergodic. In contrast to J-walking rather than the high
temperature walk feeding configurations to the low temperature walk, the high and low
temperature walkers exchange configurations. By exchanging configurations detailed balance
is satisfied, once the Metropolis walks at the two temperatures are sufficiently long to be
in the asymptotic region. To verify detailed balance is satisfied by the parallel tempering
procedure we let
′

ρ2 (r, r′ ) = Z −1 e−βU (r) e−βJ U (r )

(11)

be the joint density that the low temperature walker is at configuration r and the high
temperature walker is at configuration r′ . When configurations between the two walkers are
exchanged, the detailed balance condition is
ρ2 (r, r′)K(r → r′ , r′ → r) = ρ2 (r′ , r)K(r′ → r, r → r′ )

(12)

By solving for the ratio of the conditional transition probabilities
K(r → r′ , r′ → r)
= exp[−(β − βJ )(U(r′ ) − U(r))],
′
′
K(r → r, r → r )

(13)

it is evident that if exchanges are accepted with the same probability as the acceptance
criterion used in J-walking [see Eq.(10)], detailed balance is satisfied.
Although the basic notions used by both J-walking and parallel tempering are similar,
the organization of a parallel tempering calculation can be significantly simpler than the
organization of a J-walking calculation. In parallel tempering no external distributions are
required nor are multiple processors required at any temperature. Parallel tempering can

be organized in the same simple way that serial tandem J-walking is organized as discussed
in the original J-walking reference.18 Unlike serial tandem J-walking where detailed balance
can be attained only asymptotically, parallel tempering satisfies detailed balance directly.
For a problem as difficult as LJ38 where very long simulations are required, the huge external distributions needed in serial J-walking, or the large set of jumping processors needed
in parallel J-walking, make the method prohibitive. As discussed in Section III, parallel
tempering can be executed for arbitrarily long simulations making the method suitable at
least for LJ38 .
In the current calculation parallel tempering is used not just to simulate the system at
some low temperature using high temperature information, but simulations are performed
for a series of temperatures. As is the case for J-walking18 and as discussed elsewhere for
parallel tempering,22 the gaps between adjacent temperatures cannot be chosen arbitrarily.
Temperature gaps must be chosen so that exchanges are accepted with sufficient frequency.
If the temperature gap is too large, the configurations important at the two exchanging
temperatures can be sufficiently dissimilar that no exchanges are ever accepted. Preliminary
calculations must be performed to explore the temperature differences needed for acceptable
exchange probabilities. In practice we have found at least 10% of attempted exchanges need
to be accepted for the parallel tempering procedure to be useful. In general the temperature
gaps must be decreased near phase change regions or when the temperature becomes low.
By exchanging configurations between temperatures, correlations are introduced at different temperature points. For example, the average heat capacities at two temperatures
may rise or fall together as each value fluctuates statistically. In some cases the values of
the heat capacities or other properties at two temperatures can be anti-correlated. The
magnitude of these correlations between temperatures are measured and discussed in Section III. As discussed in Section III the correlations between differing temperatures imply
that the statistical fluctuations must be sufficiently low to ensure any features observed in
a calculation as a function of temperature are meaningful.

III. RESULTS

Forty distinct temperatures have been used in the parallel tempering simulations of LJ38
ranging from T = 0.0143ε/kB to T = 0.337ε/kB . The simulations have been initiated
from random configurations of the 38 atoms within a constraining sphere of radius 2.25
σ. We have chosen Rc = 2.25σ, because we have had difficulties attaining ergodicity with
larger constraining radii. With large constraining radii, the system has a significant boiling region at temperatures not far from the melting region, and it is difficult to execute
an ergodic walk with any method when there is coexistence between liquid-like and vapor
regions. Constraining radii smaller than 2.25σ can induce significant changes in thermodynamic properties below the temperature of the melting peak. Using the randomly initialized
configurations the initialization time to reach the asymptotic region in the Monte Carlo walk
has been found to be long with about 95 million Metropolis Monte Carlo points followed
by 190 million parallel tempering Monte Carlo points included in the walk prior to data
accumulation. This long initiation period can be made significantly shorter by initializing
each temperature with the structure of the global minimum. We have chosen to initialize
the system with random configurations to verify the parallel tempering method is able to
equilibrate this system with no prior knowledge about the structure of the potential surface.
Following this initiation period, 1.3 × 1010 points have been included with data accumulation. Parallel tempering exchanges have been attempted every 10 Monte Carlo passes over
the 38 atoms in the cluster.
In an attempt to minimize the correlations in the data at differing temperatures, an
exchange strategy has been used that includes exchanges between several temperatures. To
understand this strategy, we let the set of temperatures be put into an array. One-half of
the exchanges have been attempted between adjacent temperatures in the array, one-fourth
have been attempted between next near neighboring temperatures, one-eighth between every
third temperature, one-sixteenth between every fourth temperature and one-thirty second
between every fifth temperature in the array. We have truncated this procedure at fifth near

neighboring temperatures, because exchanges between temperatures differing by more than
fifth neighbors are accepted with frequencies of less than ten per cent. The data presented
in this work have been generated using the procedure outlined above. In retrospect, we have
found exchanges are only required between adjacent temperatures. We have also performed
the calculations where exchanges are included only between adjacent temperatures, and
we have seen no significance differences either in the final results or in the correlations
between different temperatures. Using the random initializations of the clusters, after the
initialization period the lowest temperature walks are dominated by configurations well
represented by small amplitude oscillations about the global minimum structure.
For all data displayed in this work, the error bars represent two standard deviations of
the mean. The heat capacity, calculated from the standard fluctuation expression of the
energy
CV = kB β 2 [ E 2 − E 2 ],

(14)

is displayed in the upper panel of Fig. 1. In agreement with the heat capacity for LJ38
reported by Doye et al.,14 the heat capacity displayed in Fig. 1 has a melting maximum
centered at about T = 0.166ε/kB . In contrast to the results of Doye et al.14 we find no
maximum associated with the solid-solid transition between the two basins in the potential
surface. Rather, we see a small change in slope at about T = 0.1ε/kB . To characterize
this region having a change in slope, in the lower panel of Fig. 1 we present a graph of
(∂CV /∂T )V calculated from the fluctuation expression
∂CV
∂T

= −2
V

CV
1
+ 2 4 [ E3 + 2 E
T
kB T

3

− 3 E2 E ]

(15)

The small low temperature maximum in (∂CV /∂T )V occurs within the slope change region.
To interpret the configurations associated with the various regions of the heat capacity, we
use an order parameter nearly identical to the order parameter introduced by Steinhardt,
Nelson and Ronchetti39 to distinguish face centered cubic from icosahedral structures in
liquids and glasses. The order parameter has been used by Doye et al.5 to monitor phase
changes in LJ38 . The order parameter Q4 is defined by the equation

1/2



where

4π 4
|Q |2 
Q4 = 
9 m=−4 4,m

Q4,m =

1
Nb

,

(16)

Y4,m (θij , φij ).

(17)

rij <rb

To understand the parameters used in Eq.(17), it is helpful to explain how Q4,m is evaluated.
The center of mass of the full 38 atom cluster is located and the atom closest to the center of
mass is then identified. The atom closest to the center of mass plus the 12 nearest neighbors
of that atom define a “core” cluster of the 38 atom cluster. The center of mass of the core
cluster is then calculated. The summation in Eq.(17) is performed over all vectors that point
from the center of mass of the core cluster to all Nb bonds formed from the 13 atoms of
the core cluster. A bond is assumed to be formed between two atoms of the core cluster if
their internuclear separation rij is less than a cut-off parameter rb , taken to be rb = 1.39σ
in this work. In Eq.(17) θij and φij are respectively the polar and azimuthal angles of the
vector that points from the center of mass of the core cluster to the center of each bond,
and Y4,m (θ, φ) is a spherical harmonic. To verify that the optimal value of Q4 is obtained,
the procedure is repeated by choosing the second closest atom to the center of mass of the
whole cluster to define the core cluster. The value of Q4 obtained from this second core
cluster is compared with that obtained from the first core cluster, and the smallest resulting
value of Q4 is taken to be the value of Q4 for the entire cluster.
In the work of Steinhardt et al.39 fewer bonds are included in the summation appearing
in Eq.(17) than in the current work. In the definition used by Steinhardt et al.,39 the only
bonds that contribute to the sum in Eq.(17) are those involving the central atom of the
core cluster. In the definition used in this work, at low temperatures the sum includes all
the bonds included by Steinhardt et al.39 in addition to vectors that connect the center
of mass of the core cluster with the centers of bonds that connect atoms at the surface
of the core cluster with each other. For a perfect and undistorted icosahedral or truncated
octahedral cluster, the current definition and the definition of Steinhardt et al.39 are identical

numerically owing to the rotational symmetry of the spherical harmonics. However, for
distorted clusters the two definitions differ numerically. For perfect, undistorted icosahedral
clusters Q4 = 0 whereas for perfect, undistorted truncated octahedral clusters, Q4 ∼
= 0.19,
and both definitions of the order parameter are able to distinguish configurations from the
truncated octahedral basin and other basins at finite temperatures. However, we have found
the definition introduced by Steinhardt et al.39 is unable to distinguish structures in the
icosahedral basin from liquid-like structures. This same issue has been discussed previously
by Lynden-Bell and Wales.40 In contrast, we have found that liquid-like structures have
larger values of Q4 than icosahedral structures when the present definition of Q4 [i.e the
definition that includes additional bonds in Eq.(17)], is used. Consequently, as discussed
shortly, the current definition of Q4 enables an association of each configuration with either
the icosahedral basin, the truncated octahedral basin, or structures that can be identified
as liquid-like.
The average of Q4 as a function of temperature is plotted in the upper panel of Fig. 2.
Again the error bars represent two standard deviations of the mean. At the lowest calculated
temperatures Q4 is characteristic of the global truncated octahedral minimum. As the
temperature is raised to the point where the slope change begins in the heat capacity, Q4
begins to drop rapidly signifying the onset of transitions between the structures associated
with the global minimum and icosahedral structures. We then have the first hint that the
slope change in CV is associated with a analogue of a solid-solid transition from the truncated
octahedron to icosahedral structures.
To clarify the transition further, the data plotted in the lower panel of Fig. 2 represent
the probability of observing particular values of Q4 as a function of temperature. The
probabilities have been calculated by tabulating the frequency of observing particular values
of Q4 for each configuration generated in the simulation. Different values of Q4 are then
assigned to either icosahedral structures (labeled IC in the graph), truncated octahedral
structures (labeled FCC) or liquid-like structures (labeled LIQ). below. By comparing the
lower panel of Fig. 2 with the derivative of the heat capacity plotted in the lower panel of

Fig. 1, it is evident that icosahedral structures begin to be occupied and the probability
of finding truncated octahedral structures begins to fall when the derivative in the heat
capacity begins to rise. Equilibrium between the truncated octahedral structures and the
icosahedral structures continues into the melting region, and truncated octahedral structures
only disappear on the high temperature side of the melting peak of the heat capacity. Doye
et al.14 and Miller et al.15 have generated data analogous to that depicted in the lower
panel of Fig. 2 using the superposition method, and the data of Miller et al.15 are in
qualitative agreement with the present data. A more direct comparison with the data of
these authors can be made by performing periodic quenching along the parallel tempering
trajectories. We then use an energy criterion similar to that of Doye et al.14 to distinguish
the three categories of geometries and to generate the respective probabilities P . For a
given total cluster energy E, a truncated octahedron is associated with E < −173.26ε,
icosahedral-based structures with −173.26ε ≤ E < −171.6ε, and liquid-like structures with
E ≥ −171.6ε. The quenches have been performed every 104 MC steps for each temperature,
and the results of these quenches are plotted in Fig. 3. Using the energy criterion, the
behavior we observe is qualitatively similar to the data of Doye et al..14 However, the largest
probability of observing icosahedral structures is found here to be substantially lower than
Doye et al.14 The data accumulated more recently by Miller et al.15 using the superposition
method include contributions from more stationary points than in the previous work of Doye
et al.,14 but no reweighting has been performed. As a result, the distributions of isomers
look quite different, especially at high temperatures.14
The assignment of a particular value of Q4 to a structure as displayed in Fig. 2, is made
by an analysis of the probability distribution PQ (T, Q4 ) of the order parameter displayed in
Figs. 4 and 5. Figure 4 is a representation of the three-dimensional surface of PQ (T, Q4 )
as a function of temperature and order parameter. A projection of this surface onto two
dimensions is given in Fig. 5. The probability density in Fig. 5 is represented by the shading
so that the brighter the area the greater the probability. The horizontal white lines in Fig.
5 define the regions of the heat capacity curve. The lowest temperature horizontal line

represents the temperature at which the slope of the heat capacity first changes rapidly, the
middle temperature horizontal line represents the lowest temperature of the melting peak
and the highest temperature horizontal line represents the end of the melting region. An
additional representation of the data is given in Fig. 6, where the probability of observing
particular values of Q4 is given as a function of Q4 at a fixed temperature of 0.14ε/kB . In
Fig. 6 three regions are evident for PQ (T = 0.14ε/kB , Q4 ) with Q4 ranging from 0.13 to
0.19. Although the presence of three regions seems to indicate three distinct structures, all
three regions correspond to the truncated octahedral global minimum. We have verified this
assignment by quenching the structures with Q4 ranging from 0.13 to 0.19 to their nearest
local minima, and we have found all such structures quench to the truncated octahedron.
To explain the three regions, we have found that there are small distortions of LJ38 about
the truncated octahedral structure where both the energy and Q4 increase together. These
regions where both the energy and Q4 increase above Q4 ∼
= 0.13 have low probability and
account for the oscillations observed in Figs. 4–6. In the lower panel of Fig. 2, all structures
having Q4 > 0.13 have been identified as truncated octahedra. Quench studies of the broad
region visible in Fig. 5 at the lowest values of Q4 , or equivalently in the first low Q4 peak in
Fig. 6 find all examined structures to belong to the icosahedral basin. To determine if a given
configuration is associated with the icosahedral basin, one-dimensional cross sectional plots
are made from Fig. 4 at each temperature used in the calculation. Figure 6 is a particular
example of such a cross sectional plot. The maximum present at low Q4 represents the
center for structures in the icosahedral basin. The next two maxima at higher Q4 represents
the midpoint of the liquid region. Consequently, in generating the lower panel of Fig. 2, all
configurations with Q4 between Q4 = 0 and the first minimum in Fig. 6 have been identified
as icosahedral structures. All other values of Q4 , represented by the broad intermediate
band in Fig. 5 (or the region about the second two maxima in Fig. 6), have been identified
as liquid-like structures. To make these identifications, separate cross sections of Fig. 4 must
be made at each temperature. Of course, it is impossible to verify that the identification of
all values of Q4 with a particular structure as discussed above would agree with the result of

quenching the structure to its nearest potential minimum. The differences found by defining
icosahedral, truncated octahedral or liquid-like structures using either an energy criterion
or Q4 is clarified by comparing Fig. 3 and the lower panel of Fig. 2. Both definitions are
arbitrary, and the information carried by the two classification methods complement each
other.
Figure 5 also provides additional evidence that the peak in (∂CV /∂T )V is associated with
the equilibrium between the truncated octahedral structures and the icosahedral structures.
There is significant density for both kinds of structures in the region between the lowest two
parallel lines that define the region with the slope change. Additionally, both icosahedral
structures and truncated octahedral structures begin to be in equilibrium with each other at
the beginning of the slope change region. This equilibrium continues to temperatures above
the melting region.
Another identification of the slope change region with a transition between truncated
octahedral and icosahedral forms can be made by defining PR (T, R)dR to be the probability
that an atom in the cluster is found at location R to R + dR from the center of mass of the
cluster at temperature T . A projection of PR (T, R) onto the R and T plane is depicted in
Fig. 7. The solid vertical lines represent the location of atoms from the center of mass of
the truncated octahedral structure (the lower set of vertical lines), and the lowest energy
icosahedral structure (the upper set of vertical lines). As in Fig. 5, increased probability
is represented by the lighter shading. At the lowest temperatures PR (T, R) is dominated
by contributions from the truncated octahedron as is evident by comparing the shaded
regions with the lowest set of vertical lines. As the temperature is increased, contributions
to PR (T, R) begin to appear from the icosahedral structures. The shaded region at R = 0.45
does not match any of the vertical lines shown, but corresponds to atoms in the third lowest
energy isomer, which like the second lowest energy isomer, comes from the icosahedral basin.
The equilibrium between the icosahedral and truncated octahedral structures observed in
Fig. 7 matches the regions of temperature observed in Fig. 5.
We have mentioned previously that parallel tempering introduces correlations in the data

accumulated at different temperatures, and it is important to ensure the statistical errors
are sufficiently small that observed features are real and not artifacts of the correlations.
To measure these correlations we define a cross temperature correlation function for some
temperature dependent property g by
γ(T1 , T2 ) =

(g(T1 ) − g(T1 ) )(g(T2) − g(T2 ) )
.
[ (g(T1) − g(T1 ) )2 (g(T2) − g(T2) )2 ]1/2

(18)

A projection of γ(T1 , T2 ) when g = CV is given in Fig. 8. In Fig. 8 white represents
γ = 1 and black represents γ = −1 with other shadings representing values of γ between
these two extremes. The white diagonal line from the lower left hand corner to the upper
right hand corner represents the case that T1 = T2 so that γ = 1. The light shaded areas
near this diagonal represent cases where T1 and T2 are adjacent temperatures in the parallel
tempering simulations, and we find γ to be only slightly less than unity. More striking are
the black regions off the diagonal where γ is nearly −1. These black regions correspond to
anti-correlations between results at temperatures near the heat capacity maximum in the
melting peak and temperatures near the center of the slope change region associated with
the transition between icosahedral and truncated octahedral structures. These correlations
imply the importance of performing sufficiently long simulations to ensure that statistical
fluctuations of the data are small compared to important features in the data as a function
of temperature.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Using parallel tempering methods we have successfully performed ergodic simulations of
the equilibrium thermodynamic properties of LJ38 in the canonical ensemble. As discussed
by Doye et al.5 the potential surface of this system is complex with two significant basins; a
narrow basin about the global minimum truncated octahedral structure, and a wide icosahedral basin. These two basins are separated both by structure and a large energy barrier
making simulations difficult. In agreement with the results of Doye et al.14 we find clear

evidence of equilibria between structures at the basin of the global minimum and the icosahedral basin at temperatures below the melting region. Unlike previous work we find no
heat capacity maximum associated with this transition, but rather a region with a change
in the slope of the heat capacity as a function of temperature.
We have found parallel tempering to be successful with this system, and have noted
correlations in our data at different temperatures when the parallel tempering method is
used. These correlations imply the need to perform long simulations so that the statistical
errors are sufficiently small that the correlations do not introduce artificial conclusions.
We believe that the methods used in this work could be applied to a variety of other
systems including clusters of complexity comparable to LJ38 . For instance, the 75-atom
Lennard-Jones cluster is known to share many features with the 38-atom cluster investigated here. LJ75 is also characterized by a double funnel energy landscape, one funnel being
associated with icosahedral structures, and the other funnel being associated with the decahedral global minimum. The landscape of LJ75 has been recently investigated by Doye,
Miller and Wales6 who have used Q6 as the order parameter. In another paper,2 Wales and
Doye have predicted that the temperature where the decahedral/icosahedral equilibrium
takes place should be close to 0.09ε/kB . This prediction is made by using the superposition method, but no caloric curves have yet been reported for LJ75 . The parallel tempering
Monte Carlo method can be expected to work well for LJ75 , and such a parallel tempering
study would be another good test case for theoretical methods discussed in this work.
A useful enhancement of parallel tempering Monte Carlo is the use of multiple histogram
methods13,41 that enables the calculation of thermodynamic functions in both the canonical
and microcanonical ensembles by the calculation of the microcanonical entropy. In practice
the multiple histogram method requires the generation of histograms of the potential energy
at a set of temperatures such that there is appreciable overlap of the potential energy
distributions at adjacent temperatures. This overlap requirement is identical to the choice
of temperatures needed in parallel tempering.
In performing simulations on LJ38 we have tried other methods to reduce ergodicity

errors, and we close this section by summarizing the difficulties we have encountered with
these alternate methods. It is important to recognize that the parallel tempering simulations
include in excess of 1010 Monte Carlo points, and most of our experience with these alternate
methods have come from significantly shorter simulations. Our ability to include this large
number of Monte Carlo points with parallel tempering is an important reason why we feel
parallel tempering is so useful.
¿From experience with other smaller and simpler clusters, for a J-walking simulation
to include 1010 points, an external distribution containing at least 109 points is required
to prevent oversampling of the distribution. Such a large distribution is prohibitive with
current computer technology. Our J-walking simulations containing about 107 Monte Carlo
points have resulted in data that have not been internally reproducible, and data that are not
in good agreement with the parallel tempering data. Many long J-walking simulations with
configurations initiated at random only have icosahedral structures at the lowest calculated
temperatures. To stabilize the J-walking method with respect to the inclusion of truncated
octahedral structures at low temperatures, we have attempted to generate distributions using
the modified potential energy function Um (r, λ) = U(r) − λQ4 . In this modified potential
λ is a parameter chosen to deepen the octahedral basin without significantly distorting the
cluster. While this modified potential has led to more stable results than J-walking using
the bare potential, the results with 108 Monte Carlo points have not been reproducible in
detail. The application of Tsallis distributions24 has not improved this situation.
We have also tried to apply the multicanonical J-walking approach recently introduced
by Xu and Berne.25 While this multicanonical approach has been shown to improve the
original J-walking strategy for other cluster systems, in the case of LJ38 the iterations needed
to produce the external multicanonical distribution have not produced truncated octahedral
structures. The iterations have produced external distributions having either liquid-like
structures or structures from the icosahedral basin. The multicanonical distribution is known
to have deficiencies at low energies, and this low energy difficulty appears to be problematic
for LJ38 . We have attempted to solve these deficiencies by including prior information about

the thermodynamics of the system. In this attempt we have chosen the multicanonical weight
to be wmu (U) = exp[−SPT (U)] where SPT (U) is the microcanonical entropy extracted from
a multihistogram analysis13,41 of a parallel tempering Monte Carlo simulation. In several
attempts using this approach we have not observed either the truncated octahedral structure
nor structures from the icosahedral basin with significant probability. The multicanonical
distribution so generated is dominated by liquid-like structures, and the distribution appears
to be incapable of capturing the solid-to-solid transition that leads to the low temperature
peak in (∂CV /∂T )V . Whether there are other approaches to generate a multicanonical
distribution that are more successful in capturing low temperature behaviors is unknown to
us.
Much insight about phase change behaviors can be obtained from simulations in the
microcanonical ensemble or using molecular dynamics methods. For example, the van der
Waals loops observed in LJ55 13 complement the interpretation of the canonical caloric curves.
In the next paper27 we present parallel tempering results for LJ38 using both molecular
dynamics and microcanonical Monte Carlo methods.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Some of this work has been motivated by the attendance of two of us (DLF and FC)
at a recent CECAM meeting on ‘Overcoming broken ergodicity in simulations of condensed
matter systems.’ We would like to thank CECAM, J.E. Straub and B. Smit who organized
the meeting, and those who attended the workshop for stimulating discussions, particularly
on the connections between J-walking and parallel tempering. Two of us (DLF and JPN)
would also like to thank Professor M.P. Nightingale for helpful discussions concerning the
parallel tempering method. This work has been supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under grant numbers CHE-9714970 and CDA-9724347. This research has been
supported in part by the Phillips Laboratory, Air Force Material Command, USAF, through
the use of the MHPCC under cooperative agreement number F29601-93-0001. The views

and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed
or implied, of Phillips Laboratory or the U.S. Government.

REFERENCES
1

F.F. Abraham, Homogeneous Nucleation Theory (Academic, New York, 1974).

2

D.J. Wales and J.P.K. Doye, J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 5111 (1997).

3

D.L. Freeman and J.D. Doll, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 47, 43 (1980).

4

J. Xie, J.A. Northby, D.L. Freeman and J.D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 612 (1989).

5

J.P.K. Doye, M.A. Miller and D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 6896 (1999).

6

J.P.K. Doye, M.A. Miller and D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 8417 (1999)

7

R.H. Leary and J.P.K. Doye, Phys. Rev. E 60, R6320 (1999).

8

R. Czerminski and R. Elber, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 5580 (1990).

9

O.M. Becker and M. Karplus, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 1495 (1997).

10

C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 4’th Edition (John Wiley, New York, 1971)

11

E.K. Parks, G.C. Nieman, K.P. Kerns and S.J. Riley, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 1861 (1997).

12

R.S. Berry, T.L. Beck, H.L. David and J. Jellinek, Adv. Chem. Phys. 70B, 75 (1988).

13

P. Labastie and R.L. Whetten, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1567 (1990).

14

J.P.K. Doye, D.J. Wales and M.A. Miller, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 8143 (1998).

15

M.A. Miller, J.P.K. Doye and D.J. Wales, Phys. Rev. E 60, 3701 (1999).

16

D.J. Wales, Mol. Phys. 78, 151 (1993).

17

J.P.K. Doye and D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 9659 (1995).

18

D.D. Frantz, D.L. Freeman and J.D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 2769 (1990).

19

E. Marinari and G. Parisi, Europhys. Lett. 19, 451 (1992).

20

C.J. Geyer and E.A. Thompson, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 90, 909 (1995).

21

M.C. Tesi, E.J. Janse van Rensburg, E. Orlandini and S.G. Whittington, J. Stat. Phys.
82, 155 (1996).

22

M. Falcioni and M.W. Deem, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 1754 (1999).

23

Q. Yan and J.J. de Pablo, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 9509 (1999).

24

I. Andricioaei and J.E. Straub, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 9117 (1997).

25

H. Xu and B.J. Berne, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 10299 (1999).

26

B. Berg and T. Neuhaus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 9 (1991).

27

F. Calvo, J.P. Neirotti, D.L. Freeman and J.D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. (following article).

28

M.A. Kalos and P.A Whitlock, Monte Carlo Methods (John Wiley, New York, 1986).

29

D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulations (Academic, San Diego,
1996).

30

N. Metropolis, A.W. Rosenbluth, M.N. Rosenbluth, A.H. Teller and E. Teller, J. Chem.
Phys. 21, 1087 (1953).

31

A. Matro, D.L. Freeman and R.Q. Topper, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 8690 (1996).

32

A. Dullweber, M.P. Hodges and D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 1530 (1997).

33

D.D. Frantz, D.L. Freeman and J.D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 5713 (1992).

34

M.A. Strozak, G.E. Lopez and D.L. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys. 97, 4445 (1992).

35

G.E. Lopez and D.L. Freeman, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1428 (1993).

36

E. Curotto, D.L. Freeman, B. Chen and J.D. Doll, Chem. Phys. Lett. 295, 366 (1998).

37

C.J. Tsai and K.D. Jordan, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 6957 (1993).

38

A.J. Acevedo, L.M. Caballero and G.E. Lopez, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 7257 (1997).

39

P.J. Steinhardt, D.R. Nelson and M. Ronchetti, Phys. Rev. B 28, 784 (1983).

40

R.M. Lynden-Bell and D.J. Wales, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 1460 (1994).

41

A.M. Ferrenberg and R.H. Swendsen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2635 (1988).

FIGURES
FIG. 1. The heat capacity CV per particle of LJ38 in units of kB (upper panel) and (∂CV /∂T )V
per particle (lower panel) as a function of reduced temperature. The small low temperature maximum in the derivative associated with a change in slope of the heat capacity identifies the transition
region between the truncated octahedral basin and the icosahedral basin. The large heat capacity
peak identifies the melting region.
FIG. 2. The expectation value of the order parameter (upper panel) and the order parameter
probability distribution (lower panel) as a function of reduced temperature. In the lower panel
FCC labels the truncated octahedron, IC labels structures from the icosahedral basin and LIQ
labels structures from the liquid region. The transition between FCC and IC occurs at the same
temperature as the low temperature peak in (∂CV /∂T )V in Fig. 1.
FIG. 3. The probability distributions of observing different structures as a function of temperature using the energy criterion. The labels are the same as those defined in the lower panel of
Fig. 2, and the data complements the interpretation of the lower panel of Fig. 2
FIG. 4. The probability of observing configurations with particular values of Q4 with Q4 displayed along one axis and the reduced temperature displayed along the other axis. The large peak
at low temperatures comes from the truncated octahedral structures and the broad region with
small Q4 at intermediate temperatures represents structures in the icosahedral basin.
FIG. 5. A projection of Fig. 4 onto the T -Q4 plane. The probability is measured by the shading
with increasing probability represented by lighter shading. The lowest temperature horizontal white
line represents the temperature at which transitions between the icosahedral and lowest energy
basins begin. The second lowest temperature horizontal white line represents the beginning of the
melting region, and the highest temperature horizontal white line represents the end of the melting
peak of the heat capacity. The coexistence of icosahedral and octahedral structures continues into
the melting region.

FIG. 6. The probability of observing configurations with particular values of Q4 as a function
of Q4 at T = 0.14ε/kB . The region from Q4 = 0 through the first maximum to the first minimum
defines the icosahedral basin at T = 0.14ε/kB , the region from the first minimum to the third
defines liquid-like structures, and the region about the three maxima having the highest values of
Q4 define the truncated octahedral basin. The oscillations in the truncated octahedral basin arise
from distorted structures of low probability where both the energy and Q4 rise together.
FIG. 7. The projected probability of observing particles a distance R from the center of mass of
LJ38 as a function of R and reduced temperature. As in Fig. 5 increased probability is represented
by the lightest shading. The lower vertical lines represent the location of atoms in the fully relaxed
truncated octahedron and the upper vertical lines represent the location of atoms in the fully
relaxed icosahedral structure that is lowest in energy. Equilibrium between the icosahedral and
octahedral forms are observed in the same temperature range as found in Figs. 2 and 5.
FIG. 8. γ(T1 , T2 ) for the heat capacity as defined in Eq.(18) [with g = CV ] as a function of
reduced temperature along two axes. White shading represents γ = 1 and black represents γ = −1.
The white diagonal line connecting the lower left hand corner with the upper right hand corner
indicates T1 = T2 so that γ = 1. The black areas show anti-correlation from parallel tempering
between the heat capacity calculated at the maximum of the heat capacity and the center of the
change in slope region.

6.0

〈 CV 〉 / NkB

5.0

4.0

3.0

(1/NkB) ( ∂〈CV 〉 / ∂T )V

100

50

0

−50

−100
0.0

0.1

kBT / ε

0.2

0.3

0.20

〈 Q4 〉

0.15

0.10

0.05

1.0
IC
LIQ
FCC

0.8

PQ

4

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.0

0.1

kBT / ε

0.2

0.3

1.0

IC
LIQ
FCC

0.8

P

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

kBT / ε

0.3

0.337

0.273

k BT

0.21

0.14

0.071

0.002
0

0.45

0.9

1.35
Q4

1.8

2.25

90

PQ (T = 0.14 ε / kB , Q4 )

70

50

30

10

0.00

0.05

0.10

Q4

0.15

0.20

0.337

0.282

k BT

0.227

0.171

0.12

0.061

0.061 0.12 0.171 0.227 0.282 0.337
k BT

