arXiv:math/0003001v1 [math.GM] 1 Mar 2000

EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION OF INTERACTIVE
PHENOMENA AND THEIR ANALYSIS

Denis V. Juriev
ul.Miklukho-Maklaya 20-180 Moscow 117437 Russia
(e-mail: denis@juriev.msk.ru)
math.GM/0003001
The article is devoted to mathematical methods of experimental detection of interactive phenomena in complex systems and their analysis.

This article may be regarded as an account of conclusions from the ten year author’s practical researches on the joint of experimental mathematics, experimental
psychophysics and computer science in the problems of visual perception in the interactive videosystems and from his parallel theoretical studies on interactivity and
tactics. The current exposition is self-consistent and claims a minimal knowledge
of the experimental or theoretical basis, which underlies it. The goal of the article
is to discuss the methods of experimental detection of interactive phenomena and
of their analysis. Though the author had deal presumably with the interactive phenomena in perception the resulted scheme is applicable to many systems of natural,
behavioral, social and economical sciences and it is reasonable to think that many
concrete specialists will find it useful for their own needs in the nearest future.
I. Experimental detection of interactive phenomena
Let us consider a natural, behavioral, social or economical system S. It will be
described by a set {ϕ} of quntities, which characterize it at any moment of time t
(so that ϕ = ϕt ). One may suppose that the evolution of the system is described
by a differential equation
ϕ˙ = Φ(ϕ)
and look for the explicit form of the function Φ from the experimental data on the
system S. However, the function Φ may depend on time, it means that there are
some hidden parameters, which control the system S and its evolution is of the
form
ϕ˙ = Φ(ϕ, u),
where u are such parameters of unknown nature. One may suspect that such
parameters are chosen in a way to minimize some goal function K, which may be
an integrodifferential functional of ϕt :
K = K([ϕτ ]τ ≤t )

(such integrodifferential dependence will be briefly notated as K = K([ϕ]) below).
More generally, the parameters u may be divided on parts u = (u1 , . . . , un ) and each
part ui has its own goal function Ki . However, this hypothesis may be confirmed
by the experiment very rarely. In the most cases the choice of parameters u will
seem accidental or even random. Nevertheless, one may suspect that the controls
ui are interactive, it means that they are the couplings of the pure controls u◦i with
the unknown or incompletely known feedbacks:
ui = ui (ui◦ , [ϕ])
and each pure control has its own goal function Ki . Thus, it is suspected that the
system S realizes an interactive game. There are several ways to define the pure
controls u◦i . One of them is the integrodifferential filtration of the controls ui :
u◦i = Fi ([ui ], [ϕ]).
To verify the formulated hypothesis and to find the explicit form of the convenient
filtrations Fi and goal functions Ki one should use the theory of interactive games,
which supplies us by the predictions of the game, and compare the predictions with
the real history of the game for any considered Fi and Ki and choose such filtrations
and goal functions, which describe the reality better. One may suspect that the
dependence of ui on ϕ is purely differential for simplicity or to introduce the socalled intention fields, which allow to consider any interactive game as differential.
Moreover, one may suppose that
ui = ui (u◦i , ϕ)
and apply the elaborated procedures of a posteriori analysis and predictions to the
system.
In many cases this simple algorithm effectively unravels the hidden interactivity
of a complex system.
II. Analysis of interactive phenomena
Below we shall consider the complex systems S, which have been yet represented
as the n-person interactive games by the procedure described above.
2.1. Functional analysis of interactive phenomena. To perform an analysis
of the interactive control let us note that often for the n-person interactive game
the interactive controls ui = ui (u◦i , [ϕ]) may be represented in the form
ui = ui (u◦i , [ϕ]; εi ),
where the dependence of the interactive controls on the arguments u◦i , [ϕ] and εi is
known but the ε-parameters εi are the unknown or incompletely known functions
of u◦i , [ε]. Such representation is very useful in the theory of interactive games and
is called the ε-representation.
One may regard ε-parameters as new magnitudes, which characterize the system,
and apply the algorithm of the unraveling of interactivity to them. Note that εparameters are of an existential nature depending as on the states ϕ of the system
S as on the controls.
2

The ε-parameters are useful for the functional analysis of the interactive controls
described below.
First of all, let us consider new integrodifferential filtrations Vα :
vα◦ = Vα ([ε], [ϕ]),
where ε = (ε1 , . . . , εn ). Second, we shall suppose that the ε-parameters are expressed via the new controls vα◦ , which will be called desires:
◦
εi = ε(v1◦ , . . . , vm
, [ϕ])

and the least have the goal functions Lα . The procedure of unraveling of interactivity specifies as the filtrations Vα as the goal functions Lα .
Example. Let us considered the interactive videosystem directed by the eye movements of an observer. The pure controls are the slow movements of eyes, whereas
saccads are considered as a result of the unknown feedbacks (tremor is supposed to
be random). Many classical and modern experiments clarifies the role of saccads
in the formation of the stable and complete final image so such formation may
be regarded as their goal function. The functional analysis of the eye movements
extracts the parameters (the normal forms), which describe saccads in the concrete interactive videosystems. The normal forms are extremely interesting in the
multi-user mode when the saccads of various observers begin to be correlated and
synchronized.
2.2. The second quantization of desires. Intuitively it is reasonable to consider systems with a variable number of desires. It can be done via the second
quantization.
To perform the second quantization of desires let us mention that they are defined
as the integrodifferential functionals of ϕ and ε via the integrodifferential filtrations.
So one is able to define the linear space H of all filtrations (regarded as classical
fields) and a submanifold M of the dual H ∗ so that H is naturally identified with a
subspace of the linear space O(M ) of smooth functions on M . The quantized fields
of desires are certain operators in the space O(M ) (one is able to regard them as
unbounded operators in its certain Hilbert completion). The creation/annihilation
operators are constructed from the operators of multiplication on an element of
H ⊂ O(M ) and their conjugates.
To define the quantum dynamics one should separate the quick and slow time.
Quick time is used to make a filtration and the dynamics is realized in slow time.
Such dynamics may have a Hamiltonian form being governed by a quantum Hamiltonian, which is usually differential operator in O(M ).
If M coincides with the whole H ∗ then the quadratic part of a Hamiltonian describes a propagator of the quantum desire whereas the highest terms correspond
to the vertex structure of self-interaction of the quantum field. If the submanifold M is nonlinear the extraction of propagators and interaction vertices is not
straightforward.
2.3. SD-transform and SD-pairs. The interesting feature of the proposed description (which will be called the S-picture) of an interactive system S is that it
contains as the real (usually personal) subjects with the pure controls ui as the
impersonal desires vα . The least are interpreted as certain perturbations of the
3

first so the subjects act in the system by the interactive controls ui whereas the
desires are hidden in their actions.
One is able to construct the dual picture (the D-picture), where the desires act
in the system S interactively and the pure controls of the real subjects are hidden
in their actions. Precisely, the evolution of the system is governed by the equations
˜
ϕ˙ = Φ(ϕ,
v),
where v = (v1 , . . . , vm ) are the ε-represented interactive desires:
vα = vα (vα◦ , [ϕ]; ε˜α )
and the ε-parameters ε˜ are the unknown or incompletely known functions of the
states [ϕ] and the pure controls u◦i .
D-picture is convenient for a description of systems S with a variable number
of acting persons. Addition of a new person does not make any influence on the
evolution equations, a subsidiary term to the ε-parameters should be added only.
The transition from the S-picture to the D-picture is called the SD-transform.
The SD-pair is defined by the evolution equations in the system S of the form
˜
ϕ˙ = Φ(ϕ, u) = Φ(ϕ,
v),
where u = (u1 , . . . , un ), v = (v1 , . . . , vm ),
ui =ui (ui◦ , [ϕ]; εi)
vα =vα (vα◦ , [ϕ]; ε˜α )
and the ε-parameters ε = (ε1 , . . . , εn ) and ε˜ = (˜
ε1 , . . . , ε˜m ) are the unknown or
◦
◦
◦
incompletely known functions of [ϕ] and v = (v1 , . . . , vm
) or u◦ = (u◦1 , . . . , u◦n ),
respectively.
Note that the S-picture and the D-picture may be regarded as complementary
in the N.Bohr sense. Both descriptions of the system S can not be applied to it
simultaneously during its analysis, however, they are compatible and the structure
of SD-pair is a manifestation of their compatibility. The choice of a picture is an
action of our attention: it is concentrated on the personal subjects in S-picture
(the self-conscious attention) whereas it is concentrated on the impersonal desires
in D-picture (the creative attention).
2.4. Verbalization of SD-pairs and synlinguism. The main problem is to
interrelate the S- and D-pictures of the system S. One way is a verbalization of
SD-pairs. Let us remind a definition of the verbalizable interactive game.
An interactive game of the form
ϕ˙ = Φ(ϕ, u)
with ε–represented couplings of feedbacks
ui = ui (u◦i , [ϕ]; εi )
4

is called verbalizable if there exist a posteriori partition t0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tn < . . .
and the integrodifferential functionals
ωn (ε(τ ), ϕ(τ )|tn−1
u∗n (u◦ (τ ), ϕ(τ )|tn−1

tn ),

τ
τ

tn )

such that
ωn = Ω(ωn−1 , u∗n ; ϕ(τ )|tn−1

τ

tn ),

quantities ωn are called the words.
Let us now consider the SD-pair and suppose that both S- and D-pictures are
verbalizable with the same ωn . The fact that ωn are the same for both S- and
D-pictures is called their synlinguism. One may characterize it poetically by the
phrase that “the speech of real subjects is resulted in the same text as a whisper
of the impersonal desires”. The existential character of the synlinguism should be
stressed. Really it is not derived from the fact that the objective states ϕ of the
system S are the same in the S- and D-pictures. The synlinguism interrelates the
different ε-parameters of existential nature in both pictures.
The synlinguism is very important in the analysis of tactical phenomena, which
essentially used the concept of verbalization in their definition. To my mind the
synlinguism lies in the basis of psychophysical nature of mutual understanding of
the independent subjects of a dialogue communication. In this situation it allows
to identify the personal interpretations with the impersonal ones, unraveling the
role of impersonal desires as bearers of the objective sense and its dynamics.
To the verbalizable SD-pairs some procedures of linguistic analysis are applicable. Some of them are inherited from the verbalizable interactive games (the
grammatical analysis), some are specific (the explication and analysis of objective
sense).
III. Conclusions
Thus, mathematical procedures of the experimental detection of interactive phenomena in complex natural, behavioral, social and economical systems and their
analysis are described. The special attention is concentrated on the role of desires
and their second quantization as well as on the abstract structure of SD-pairs, their
verbalization and the synlinguism.

5

