arXiv:cs/0005003v1 [cs.DL] 3 May 2000

CoRR: A Computing Research Repository∗
Joseph Y. Halpern
Computer Science Department
Cornell University
halpern@.cornell.edu
February 1, 2008

1

Introduction

Computing research relies heavily on the rapid dissemination of results. As a result, the formal
process of submitting papers to journals has been augmented by other, more rapid, dissemination methods. Originally these involved printed documents, such as technical reports and
conference papers. With the advent of the Internet, researchers developed and began to use
a variety of electronic means for rapid dissemination. Individual and organizational web sites
made it possible to provide cheap and almost instantaneous access to research results. But
these resources were fragmented. There was no single repository to which researchers from the
whole field of computing could submit reports, no single place to search for research results,
and no guarantee that information would be archived at the end of a research project.
This changed in September 1998. Through a partnership of ACM (http://www.acm.org),
the LANL (Los Alamos National Lab) e-Print archive (http://xxx.lanl.gov), and NCSTRL
(Networked Computer Science Technical Reference Library – http://www.ncstrl.org), an online
Computing Research Repository (CoRR) was established. The Repository is available to all
members of the community at no charge. They can submit papers, browse and search papers
currently on the Repository, and subscribe to get notification of new submissions.
In the rest of this article, I briefly describe how CoRR was set up and discuss some policy
issues.

2

Setting up CoRR: Issues and Decisions

ACM was (and continues to be) interested in experimenting with different approaches to disseminating research. In May 1997, a committee was formed under the auspices of the ACM
∗
This article is based on (and borrows liberally from) two earlier articles: “A Computing Research Repository”,
D-Lib Magazine, November 1998 (http://www.dlib.org/dlib/november98/11halpern.html) and “The Computing
Research Repository: Promoting the Rapid Dissemination of Computer Science Research”, Proceedings of ACM
Digital Libraries ’99, 1999, pp. 3–11. The latter article is joint with Carl Lagoze; I thank him for all his
contributions. This work was supported in part by the NSF, under grant IRI-96-25901.

1

Publications Board to consider one such change: setting up an online repository for computing
research.1 Initially, the main focus of the committee’s discussions revolved around the design
of the architecture. Three main options emerged.
The first option was to become part of the LANL repository. LANL started as a repository
for high-energy physics eprints in 1991, several years before the introduction of the Web. It
pioneered the concept of an open-access repository for fast publication of scientific research. By
eliminating the time consuming and expensive process of peer review, it has transformed the
dissemination of research in several disciplines. It now covers most of physics and has expanded
to include repositories for nonlinear sciences, mathematics, and computation and language. The
LANL archives are sometimes called a “pre-print” service, and indeed many of the eprints are
subsequently published in conventional journals, but they are intended as long-term archives,
with much greater permanence than typical Web sites.
As a base for a computing repository, LANL has many attractive features. Perhaps the
most important is that it clearly works and works well. It now has over 100,000 eprints, is
growing at the rate of about 25,000/year, handles over 100,000 transactions/day, and has over
35,000 users. Thanks to funding from the Department of Energy and the National Science
Foundation, it also has a full-time staff. It is mirrored in 15 countries, has reasonable search
facilities, and offers services such as email notification of new submissions of interest.
The ACM committee decided against this option primarily because the LANL interface was
not open, in the sense that it did not provide an interface to which other repositories could link
and was not easily amenable to extension and enhancement.
The second option considered was to become a node in NCSTRL. NCSTRL is essentially a
common interface to the technical report collections of its (currently over 100) member institutions. It has been funded by DARPA and the National Science Foundations, with most of the
technical work recently being carried out at Cornell University. The most important features
of NCSTRL from our point of view were that it was explicitly designed with an open interface
and it was a computer science effort. On the other hand, NCSTRL did not have all the software
necessary for running a repository.
The third option was to build a new system from scratch. This had the obvious advantage that we could design our own system, which hopefully would have exactly the attributes
we required, but had the equally obvious disadvantage that it would take time, money, and
expertise.
The committee settled on a hybrid approach that combines the best features of LANL and
NCSTRL, and secured the cooperation of the two groups. This allowed us to use the well-tested
LANL software for submission, notification, and searching, while still taking advantage of the
NCSTRL architecture. The NCSTRL architecture makes it easy to build new gateways from
which to access the files, with a more user-friendly interface and new features. From the point
of view of the NCSTRL interface, LANL is now just a node on NCSTRL.
We anticipated then that our use of an open protocol would encourage other scholarly
archives to join in this framework, resulting in a global multi-disciplinary research collection that
could have substantial impact on the nature of scholarly publishing. Some recent developments
have made that hope more likely to become reality; see Sections 3 and 4.
1

Appendix A gives the membership of the committee, which consisted mainly of people active in digital
libraries and electronic publishing.

2

With the major decision out of the way, there were still a number of other important
decisions that had to be made regarding how CoRR would operate:
• How should CoRR be organized? The physics and mathematics archives at LANL are
organized into a relatively small number of subject areas—38 in the case of physics and
31 in the case of mathematics. These subject areas play a number of roles. From the
perspective of document submission, they form the basis for moderation; that is, for each
subject area, there is a moderator who checks submitted papers for relatedness to the
subject (although not quality or novelty). At the user-interface level, the subject classes
are used as aids for searching, browsing, and subscribing.
The committee had to decide how to partition the computing field into subject areas. One
choice was to use the ACM classification system (see http://www.acm.org/class/1998/overview.html).
The ACM classification scheme has the advantage of being a relatively stable scheme that
covers all research in computing, which has been carefully crafted over the years. Unfortunately, it doe not map too well to the current major areas of academic computer science.
In particular, it seemed difficult to find moderators for subject areas that corresponded
to major topic under the ACM classification system.
In the end, the committee chose to use both approaches. Authors are asked to classify papers both by by choosing a subject area from a list of subject areas (of which there are currently 33; see http://xxx.lanl.gov/archive/cs/subj.html for a description of the areas) and
by choosing a primary classification from among the roughly 100 third-level headings in the
1998 ACM Computing Classification System (see http://www.acm.org/class/1998/overview.html).
While the subject areas are not mutually exclusive, nor do they (yet) provide complete
coverage of the field, they seem to better reflect the active areas of research in CS. Each
subject area has a moderator. While documents are partitioned by subject area, readers
can search and get notified of new papers both by ACM classification and subject area.
We expect to add more subject areas, subdivide current subject areas, and perhaps delete
subject areas, depending on demand over time. (Interestingly, the committee that formed
the mathematics archive at LANL chose not to use the AMS classification scheme at all, instead opting for their own subject classification; see http://xxx.lanl.gov/new/math.html.)
Notice it is authors who choose subject areas. By using the LANL software, we were
effectively committing to the LANL approach for paper submission. The LANL philosophy is to have authors do the submission, with as much automated as possible. Authors
send their documents to the LANL repository, by email, by ftp, or by using Web interface
provided by LANL. They are expected to provide their paper in specified formats, provide
an abstract, and to classify their papers by subject area and ACM class.
• What about copyright? Publishers typically require authors to transfer copyright when
they publish a paper, since it gives them more freedom of action and more control of the
disposition of the paper. The committee decided not to require any transfer of copyright
or publication rights. Authors continue to retain copyright when they submit (although
they may have to transfer rights if they wish to publish in certain journals).
• How long should papers stay on CoRR? The committee viewed CoRR as archival; the
expectation is that papers submitted will stay there permanently. This does not prevent
3

authors from updating their papers. Updated versions of a paper can be posted at any
time, but versions not removed or changed within 24 hours of submission will remain on
the repository as well. All versions are timestamped, to avoid confusion. The most recent
version of a paper is the one accessed by default, but there are pointers to the earlier
versions. This prevents a situation where, for example, author A improves on the results
of an early version of B’s paper, but finds that these improvements seem foolish when the
only version of B’s paper that is available has better results.
• What submission formats should be accepted? For many years, physicists have used TeX
as the standard format for research papers, because of the control that it provides for
representing mathematics. Therefore, the LANL archives provide excellent support for
several versions of TeX. Theoretical computer scientists also use TeX, while PostScript
has been a favorite format for computing technical reports. Currently, authors can submit documents to CoRR using Tex/LaTeX/AMSTeX, HTML+GIF, PDF, or Postscript.
However, if TeX (or one of its variants) is available, it is strongly preferred to Postscript
or PDF (see http://xxx.lanl.gov/help/faq/whytex for the reasons). If an author has generated Postscript or PDF from some variant of Tex, it will be rejected in favor of the Tex
source. (This policy has generated some controversy; see Section 3.)
• What about preservation? Long-term preservation of documents in CoRR is clearly a
serious concern. There are two orthogonal aspects to this issue. One is the concern
that disk crashes and other software and hardware failures will cause the loss of many
documents; the other involves changing platforms. The committee felt that LANL’s size
would prove to be a significant advantage in dealing with both concerns. Since LANL
has 15 mirror sites and performs frequent backups there should be more than enough
redundancy to deal with software and hardware problems. No one has a definitive answer
to the problem of platform changes, but with so many papers on LANL already, our hope
is that there will be enough pressure that, whenever platforms change, software will be
written to automatically convert the files in CoRR to whatever platform is current, just
as there is now software to convert Postscript to PDF.
• Who should participate in CoRR? Anyone can browse CoRR, search for papers, and
download papers. The LANL software permits anyone from a university, government
research lab, or industrial research lab to submit papers. (It assumes that anyone coming
from a .edu domain is from a university; the software recognizes the domain names of the
major government and industrial research labs.) Others may also submit upon request,
with some minimal argument that they are engaged in research. This filter was put in
place to make it easier to reject “crackpot” physics papers. It made sense when the
LANL archive consisted only of physics papers, especially because it is relatively easy to
characterize the places where research in physics is carried out This is not quite as easy
for computer science. CoRR is certainly not intended to be exclusive and we may have to
revisit this issue at some point, but so far it seems not to have been a problem. There have
been very few requests to submit papers to CoRR that have come from non-recognized
domains and no one who has wanted to submit to CoRR has been prevented from doing
so.

4

3

Issues Raised Through Experience

CoRR has been in operation since Sept. 15, 1998. After an initial flurry of over submissions, the
recent rate has been slightly under one submission a day. Currently there are about 1800 papers
on CoRR, with about 900 coming from a previously-existing archive at LANL on Computation
and Language, which has now been folded into CoRR. These are combined through the NCSTRL
interface with over 27,000 other papers. It is too early to tell whether CoRR will really catch
on. However, a number of groups have tentative plans to migrate archives to CoRR and to use
CoRR as a repository for journal and conference activities. The prognosis seems good.
A number of issues have arisen in the first year of operation which I briefly discuss here.
• Insistence on Source Files: There have been bitter complaints from users about the
insistence on TeX source. There seem to be two orthogonal reasons for these complaints.
The first involves ease of submission. There is no question that it much easier to submit a
single Postscript file than it is to submit a TeX file and a number of auxiliary files, such as
figures in postscript, a bibliography file, and macro files. (Note that LANL automatically
rejects TeX files that do not include all the necessary auxiliary files, pointing out which
files are missing.) A script has recently been posted on CoRR that automatically collects
all the relevant files, sparing authors the burden of doing so, thus mitigating this concern.
The second reason is that authors are concerned with the fact that source files are available
for download (although, in fact, they are rarely downloaded—readers far prefer Postscript
or PDF). Authors are concerned that the availability of the source will make plagiarism
easier and also give readers access to comments that were intended to be private. There
is a script available at CoRR that will strip comments from files. Authors also now have
the option of making their source unavailable to readers, although CoRR will still retain
the source so as to be able to use it to convert to new formats as they arise. The advisory
committee encourages authors to make the source freely available; one never knows what
other uses for the source will be found in the future. In any case, it is certainly possible to
plagiarize even from PostScript, given the availability of postscript to ASCII converters.
It is interesting to note that the physics community (which presumably has much the
same concerns as the computing community) has been submitting TeX source files to
LANL for years. This suggests that there may be cultural differences between the communities; perhaps in time the computing community will also become more comfortable
with submitting source files.
• User Interface: There have been many (legitimate!) complaints about the user interface
at CoRR (and, more generally, at LANL). Anecdotal evidence suggests that submitting
a paper for the first time can easily take over 45 minutes and be a very frustrating
experience. Things certainly go much faster and more smoothly with experience, and the
new tools introduced for TeX submissions should help, but there is no question that the
user interface could stand improvement. However, designing a good user interface takes
time and energy and CoRR is a volunteer effort. I hope and expect that over time a better
interface will be developed (or interfaces—the open architecture makes it straightforward
to access CoRR through various gateways, each of which could have their own interface).

5

• Funding: Currently, CoRR is riding on the coattails of NSF and DARPA funding provided
to LANL and NCSTRL, and this should suffice for the foreseeable future. The long-run
funding situation is not yet clear. In any case, providing the basic repository services does
not seem to be an expensive proposition. Of course, new development can be expensive,
but we should be able to take advantage of work done by other projects, so it may not be
not be necessary to do too much development in-house. Clearly, when a resource becomes
as important to a community as the LANL archives are to physicists (and I hope that
CoRR will be to computer scientists), that community will collectively work to ensure
funding. However, the economic models for electronic scholarly publishing (and for the
Internet as a whole) are still the subject of considerable investigation. It is not clear how
the funding issue will be resolved in the long run.
• Journal publication: There are fields (such as medicine and chemistry) for which publishers
will not publish papers that have appeared on the web (even on an author’s personal web
site). This seems to be easier to do in cases where one or two journals dominate a
field. It is harder in fields where there are many smaller journals, without one dominant
one. In particular, it has not been the case in computer science, and is unlikely to
become so. Researchers have come to expect that they will be able to make their papers
available rapidly at online sites, such as CoRR, while still submitting their papers to
conventional journals. Publishers may insist, as part of their copyright policy, that a
paper be withdrawn as a precondition to journal publication. In this case, at the author’s
request, the paper will indeed be withdrawn. However, this does not seem likely to be a
problem in Computer Science. All the major publishers I have checked with so far (ACM,
IEEE, SIAM, Elsevier, Academic Press, and Springer) allow authors to post post final
versions of their papers on the personal web pages and preprints on public repositories,
such as CoRR, and do not require preprints to be withdrawn. Society publishers (ACM,
IEEE, and SIAM) also allow authors to post final (journal) versions of their papers on
CoRR, with proper copyright notice.2 (In the case of ACM, this is a two-year experiment;
ACM is examining the impact that this will have on journal sales. I hope and expect that
the policy will be continued after the two-year experimental period.) As a result of
negotiations with the editorial board of Artificial Intelligence, Elsevier is allowing final
versions of papers that appear in that journal to appear on CoRR. (Elsevier apparently
does not allow this for other journals.) Even in the biological and medical sciences,
there are indications that things may change, with the advent of PubMed Central (see
http://www.nih.gov/welcome/director/pubmedcentral/pubmedcentral.htm).

4

Where do we go from here?

This is a period of change in scholarly publishing and nobody can predict the changes that
will happen over the next few years. The impact of CoRR and similar efforts on conventional
journals is, no doubt, a question that many journal publishers are asking. There are a number of possibilities. In one scenario eprint repositories such as CoRR could coexist with the
2

CoRR allows authors to indicate where papers have been published and add links to publisher’s digital
libraries.

6

conventional journal model (recognizing that that model will undoubtedly move to electronic
dissemination). For example, LANL has been providing eprint archives in physics since 1991
without apparent impact on conventional journals. In another scenario, efforts such as CoRR
could be the primary repository for journal papers, while providing the foundation for a new
and enhanced role for conventional publishers.
A bare-bones journal could be built that would simply be a collection of pointers to documents in CoRR and other federated repositories. The journal would have an editorial board
just as journals do now. Papers would be peer reviewed in the usual way. Rather than (or
in addition to) coming out in print, once a paper was accepted, the final version would be
deposited in CoRR, and there would be a pointer to it from the journal’s web site. There
currently is one such overlay journal in physics: Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical
Physics (http://www.intlpress.com/journals/AMTP). In Computer Science, the Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/jair) is also planning a
similar move. Publishers could provide value added services to authors and readers such as
summarization services, advanced searching tools, awareness, and filtering services that build
on the content in CoRR-like repositories. Clearly, if efforts such as CoRR develop into the primary vehicle for dissemination of research results, they could significantly change the business
model for scholarly publication.
The structure of CoRR makes it possible to experiment with other ways of filtering papers
besides traditional peer review. One approach that has often been suggested is that of having
a comment facility. Certainly a comment facility could be added (either in CoRR itself or in an
overlay site). Such comment facilities have met with mixed success in the past. For example,
there has been little usage of the comment facility provided by the Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research; the comment facility at the Electronic Transactions on Artificial Intelligence
(http://www.ida.liu.se/ext/etai) has seen more usage. It remains to be seen whether they will
really catch on.
Yet other forms of filtering, such as recommendations from respected members of the community, are also possible. Indeed, one such experiment, the ACM SIGMOD Digital Review, is
being planned now, and will be an overlay over CoRR.
There is clearly a need for value-added services besides filtering. As it stands, the only
attempt to organize the papers in CoRR is by means of subject classification and ACM classification. These classifications are provided by authors, without the involvement of librarians. Getting librarians actively involved in cataloging and indexing would certainly be nice,
but seems far too expensive to contemplate for the foreseeable future and will perhaps prove
unnecessary. It may well be possible to either automate the classification task or at least
provide authors assistance with this in the future, using machine-learning techniques. (See
http://www.cora.justresearch.com for a search engine that also classifies papers.) for an example of one program that does this.) In addition, I hope and expect that there will be other
overlay services that provide different organizations of the material. It is easy to imagine services
that define different specialized subcollections—for example, a collection tailored to a specific
university course or curriculum that possibly crosses standard disciplinary boundaries and includes documents in a number of repositories. Critical to all such work are good mechanisms
for citations and cross-linking; this is currently an active research area.
I have mentioned a few facilities that could be added to CoRR directly or provided by
7

overlays. It is easy to imagine other facilities that could be added or improved, such as an
automatic recommendation service. I suspect that some of the most useful ones are the ones we
cannot yet imagine. We are optimistic that, given CoRR’s open interface, these enhancements
and others will be investigated and implemented by the efforts of many researchers in the
community. I expect that, as well, CoRR will at some point grow to become, not just a
repository for eprints, but for other artifacts, such as data sets and tools.
Of course, CoRR is not the only repository in existence or being contemplated. There are
a number of efforts in other disciplines to develop online scholarly publishing archives. Significantly, there has been a recent initiative to build an open architecture for online repositories, so
that all repositories can be linked together. The architecture will in fact be based on NCSTRL’s
Dienst protocol, just as CoRR is. This open architecture will permit the federation of online
repositories, and could be an important step to creating an online Digital Library.

Appendix A: Committee Composition
Ronald Boisvert, NIST
James Cohoon, Virginia
Peter Denning (ex officio – former chair of the ACM Publications Board)
Jon Doyle, MIT
Edward Fox, Virginia Tech
James Gray, Microsoft
Joseph Halpern, Cornell (chair)
Carl Lagoze, Cornell
Bernard Lang, INRIA
Michael Lesk, Bellcore
Steve Minton, ISI
Hermann Maurer, Graz, Austria
Andrew Odlyzko, ATT
Michael O’Donnell, U. Chicago
Bernard Rous, ACM
Jerome Saltzer, MIT
Erik Sandewall, Linkoping, Sweden
Stuart Shieber, Harvard
Jeffrey Ullman, Stanford
Rebecca Wesley, Stanford
Ian Witten, Waikato, New Zealand

Acknowledgments: I have already mentioned that this article is based on two earlier articles.
I would again like to thank Carl Lagoze, my coauthor on the second article, for his contributions.
I would also like to acknowledge the contributions of the CoRR committee and the ACM
publications board, especially Bill Arms and Peter Denning, for their role in setting up and
supporting CoRR and their feedback on previous versions this article.

8

