arXiv:math-ph/0006017v1 16 Jun 2000

Constructive Field Theory and Applications:
Perspectives and Open Problems

V. Rivasseau
Centre de Physique Th´eorique, CNRS UPR 14
Ecole Polytechnique
91128 Palaiseau Cedex, FRANCE

Abstract
In this paper we review many interesting open problems in mathematical
physics which may be attacked with the help of tools from constructive field
theory. They could give work for future mathematical physicists trained with
the constructive methods well within the 21st century.

I

Introduction

Constructive field theory started in the 70’s as a program to study the existence and properties of non-trivial particular interacting field theories, those
with simple Lagrangians. Indeed it was not obvious at that time that such
structures (fulfilling a suitable set of axioms such as the Wightman axioms
[Wi]) existed at all. In three decades, not only models of field theory, first
superrenormalizable, then just renormalizable, have been built and to some
extent analyzed, but also the methods and techniques developed in constructive field theory have been applied to a wide variety of problems outside the
initial scope of the program. Constructive techniques have been applied to
equilibrium statistical mechanics, particularly to the study of critical phenomena, and to disordered systems. They have been introduced successfully
in the analysis of many Fermions models, such as those of condensed matter. They have also inspired and renewed studies in classical mechanics, and
in time dependent problems, such as non-equilibrium phenomena. It is no
longer easy to draw the contours of this nebula. However the initial group of
people who pioneered constructive field theory in the early 70’s, together with
1

a second and now a third generation of bright students, although working in
very different domains nowadays, still share in common a certain number of
features. They are usually faithful to long-term programs, maybe even stubborn! Beyond the adjective “constructive”, they share in common with the
“constructive” trend in mathematics, advocated for instance by Kronecker,
a taste for explicit solutions, together with explicit bounds, rathere than abstract existence theorems. In principle this means that when translated into
algorithms, and implemented on computers, the “constructive” analysis of
a physical model can lead to quantities computed with better precision and
better controlled accuracy.
In this review for the special issue of JMP of year 2000, we will be brief
on the successes of the past and refer to the existing books1 . Instead we
will focus on the open problems, conjectures and challenges that lie ahead
in a subject that could now perhaps be called “Constructive Physics” rather
than “Constructive Field Theory”, and which remains characterized by the
rigorous treatment of models issued from physics by hard analytic methods.
This paper does not contain any equation; its purpose is to entice the reader
to choose among the challenging problems just mentioned, and then to go
for the references, where the formalisms for the corresponding problems are
more precisely defined. Finally we apologize for the fact that the list of open
problems emphasized inevitably reflects our personal biases and interests.
I thank D. Brydges and J. Imbrie for several discussions and for their
hospitality at the University of Virginia (Charlottesville, USA) where a large
part of this paper was written; I thank also C. Kopper and V. Mastropietro
for several discussions.

II

Constructive Field Theory

This is the historical core of the theory, and in spite of some spectacular
successes, it remains largely a mine of open problems.
We recall that using the Euclidean functional integral approach, models
of non-trivial interacting field theories have been built over the past thirty
years, which satisfy Osterwalder-Schrader’s axioms, hence in turn have a
1

For classical references on constructive field theory, see [Er][Si][GJ1]; for reviews on
constructive renormalization, and the problem of asymtotic completeness, see respectively
[R] and [Ia]; and for the most recent Proceedings on constructive field theory, see [CP].

2

continuation to Minkowski space that satisfy Wightman axioms [Wi][OS][Z].
Such models are unfortunately yet restricted to space-time dimensions 2 or
3 but they include now both the first wave of superrenormalizable models,
such as P (φ)2 [GJS1][GJ1][Si], φ43 [GJ2][Fe][FO][MS] or the Yukawa model
in 2 and 3 dimensions, as well as just renormalizable models such as the
massive Gross-Neveu model in two dimensions, or GN2 [GK1,FMRS,DR1].
Most of these models have been built in the weak coupling regime, using
expansions such as the cluster and Mayer expansions; the harder models
require multiscale versions of these expansions, reshuffled according to the
renormalization group philosophy.
In most cases the relationship of the non-perturbative construction to the
perturbative one has been elucidated, the non-perturbative Green’s functions
being the Borel sum of the corresponding perturbative expansion [EMS],
[MS], [FMRS].
We identify and discuss several main areas for future progress:

II.1

Asymptotic Freedom, Four dimensional Models

By “Coleman’s theorem”, renormalizable asymptotically free field theories
in dimension 4 must involve non-Abelian gauge fields. However these fields
lead to dreadful infrared problems, e.g. confinement. Therefore no theory
satisfying the flat infinite volume Wightman’s axioms in dimension 4 (the
historic goal of constructive field theory) has been constructed yet. However in a finite volume Balaban succeeded in proving ultraviolet stability
of the effective action for non-Abelian lattice gauge theories (after an arbitrarily large number of renormalization group steps) [Ba1]. We mention
also a less advanced attempt to construct this ultraviolet limit in a particular non-standard gauge, using gauge symmetry breaking cutoffs [MRS]. This
situation is not completely satisfying. We list among open problems:
II.1.1

Non-linear sigma model

Construct the ultraviolet limit of the two dimensional O(N) non linear sigma
model, which is a well behaved asymptotically free bosonic field theory (see
e.g. [GK2] for construction of the hierarchical version of the model). It is
quite irritating that we still do not have such a construction: many experts

3

in the field tried it without success. The infrared mass generation has been
obtained recently (see [K][IT]).
II.1.2

Yang-Mills

Construct the Yang Mills 4 correlation functions in a finite volume and a
standard gauge (such as the Landau gauge). This presumably implies a
front attack on the Gribov problem.
Simplify and rewrite Balaban’s results on the lattice gauge theory. This
is no small task since references in [Ba1] total hundreds of pages. . .
II.1.3

φ44

Elucidate the nature of φ44 renormalized pertubation series, proving for instance that renormalons do exist (see [DFR]). Can one prove in full generality
that its ultraviolet limit is trivial [A1][Fr][R]?
II.1.4

Supersymmetric and Topological Field theory

Develop constructive versions of the now-popular supersymmetric field theories, and topological field theories: develop a constructive understanding of
Montonen-Olive duality in N = 4 SUSY Yang-Mills4 , and of Seiberg-Witten
duality for N = 2 SUSY Yang-Mills4 .
Since these issues represent rather formidable challenges, it may be worth
to attack first some two dimensional problems [W1]: polynomial (hence superrenormalizable) N = 2 supersymmetric field theories allow the construction of interesting quantities sensitive to topological change [W2]; then the
more difficult Wess-Zumino-Witten model at large parameter k, and the
Calabi-Yau models, are field theories in which the field takes value in a nontrivial manifold as target space.
According to the point of view of Witten [W1], developing constructive
theory of functional field theoretic integrals for these models could attract
more mathematicians to field theory and may speed up the constructive
programs in other more traditional areas too.

4

II.2

Strong Coupling or Low Temperature Results

In the regime of strong coupling or low temperature, there are less results.
Contour expansions have been used to prove the existence of the φ42 phase
transition [GJS2]. Many results have been obtained for models with an
ultra-violet cutoff, i.e. models inspired by field theory but which are truly
statistical mechanics models. For instance the phase transition and nonperturbative mass generation has been proved for the GN2 model with an
ultraviolet cutoff [KMR], and continuous symmetry breaking (in dimensions
greater or equal to 3) has been studied with renormalization group techniques [Ba2]. An interesting challenge would be to glue this non-trivial
low-temperature analysis to the construction of the ultraviolet limit when
it is possible. Since the weak-coupling expansion for the ultraviolet limit is
somewhat in contradiction with the low-temperature expansion, this should
be done first for models with an other auxiliary small parameter, such as
N-vector models at large N, where the 1/N expansion can complete in the
infrared the small coupling expansion in the ultraviolet.
Therefore the first problems to attack in that direction could be:
II.2.1

Constructive Dimensional Transmutation

Glue the ultraviolet analysis of the Gross-Neveu model [GK1][FMRS][DR1]
with the non-perturbative mass generation of the same model [KMR] at large
N, to obtain the first example of so called dimensional transmutation.
One could also glue the ultraviolet construction of φ43 to the infrared
continuous symmetry breaking analysis of [Ba2] to control the large Ncomponent φ43 model in the continuous symmetry broken phase without an
ultraviolet cutoff.
II.2.2

Constructive conformal field theory

Develop rigorous links between conformal field theory in dimension two and
constructive field theory: along this line, the first significant result should
be to prove that the phase transition of φ42 is in the same universality class
(i.e. has the same critical exponents) than the Ising 2 phase transition. This
could be later extended to P (φ2 ) models with more vacua and Potts models.
More generally it should be nice to develop contact points between conformal field theory in two dimension [BPZ], the theory of integrable systems,
5

which relies more onto algebraic tools, and constructive theory which relies
more on analysis. For instance there exist integrable lattice models of the
ADE type which scale to conformal field theories of the [BPZ] classification
at their critical point [Pa]; can we find a model which can be built with
constructive methods for every such conformal theory?

II.3

Scattering, asymptotic completeness and
Minkowski space

Develop phase space analysis and non-perturbative methods for field theory
that work directly in Minkowski space. This should lead to first proofs of
asymptotic completeness (see [Ia]) for quantum field theory models.
The easiest model in this direction may be the Gross-Neveu model since
it is “purely perturbative”: although it is just-renormalizable, hence has
a worse ultraviolet power counting than φ42 , it can be written purely as a
reshuffled perturbation series [DR1], so that in order to build it directly in
Minkowski space one does not need to develop a theory of functional integration in Minkowski space, based on stationary phase analysis; it should be
enough to simply develop a renormalization group analysis around the mass
shell hyperbola, which should resemble the renormalization group around the
Fermi surface of section IV.

II.4

Other problems

Complete in full detail the construction of the first non renormalizable field
theory, the Gross-Neveu model in three dimensions and large number of components [dCFdVMS][dV]. Construct other models of this type, for instance
the corresponding regime of the sine-Gordon model.
Develop constructive field theory in curved space-time.
Make better contact with the C ∗ -algebra approach (sometimes called axiomatic field theory). We refer to [BV] for a point of view on the renormalization group in algebraic field theory.

6

III

Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics

In this category we already mentioned the constructive study of continuous
symmetry breaking [Ba2] and dimensional transmutation in subsection II.2.1.

III.1

Coulomb gases

After proofs of Debye screening and Kosterlitz Thouless (KT) phase transition, this area (together with the study of the sine-Gordon and Thirring
model) remains very active among constructivists. For background in this
subject we refer to [BM]. Here is a list of open problems for which we thank
D. Brydges:
III.1.1
Find a direct proof of convergence of the Mayer expansion for dipoles at
low activity (which does not use a cluster expansion). The dipole-dipole
interaction should be smoothed at short distance so that it is stable.
III.1.2
Convergence of the Mayer expansion at low activity for the KT phase of the
2D Coulomb gas. This is harder than the previous problem, and involves
presumably an effective analysis of that gas in terms of multipoles.
III.1.3
Prove exponential screening in the 2D Coulomb gas at not particularly small
temperatures (down to the KT transition?).
III.1.4
Control the correlations at the KT transition.
III.1.5
Are the transitions between βKT and 1/2βKT in the D=2 Coulomb gas visible
in any correlations?
7

III.2

Disordered Systems

The proof by J. Imbrie that the three dimensional Random Field Ising model
develops symmetry breaking at zero temperature [Im] remains a beautiful
example in which rigorous constructive methods have solved a controversial
physical issue. Disordered systems are common in nature (conductors or
semi-conductors with structural defects or doping, spin glasses, real glasses,
granular or porous media, etc...). They pose particularly challenging mathematical problems, and we review here only a few of them.
III.2.1

Anderson model of an electron in a random potential

Here after the main results of [FS2] and followers on the localization regime
at high disorder or out of the continuous spectrum of the free Hamiltonian,
we feel that the main area for open problems is the weak-coupling phase.
It is expected that the Anderson 2 model And2 is always localized but with
exponentially small localization length when the coupling constant tends to
0. A proof of this statement through constructive field theory methods seems
to require first the proof of decay of a single averaged Green’s function <
G± > on a scale proportional to λ2 , the square of the coupling constant (this
also controls the density of states of the system). A constructive analysis is
under way, based on sector decomposition (as in [FMRT1]), a random matrix
analogy, and Ward identities [MPR1]. Then the real study of localization
involves the study of < G+ G− >, and requires a resummation of leading
ladders plus a study of the associated “Goldstone mode”. Therefore the
whole program is certainly as hard to complete as the BCS2 program for
interacting fermions defined in section IV below.
In dimension 3 one expects the small coupling phase to be diffusive, hence
the system should undergo an “Anderson Mott” phase transition from insulating to conducting at a certain critical coupling. To prove this one should
again first control the decay on a length scale of λ−2 of a single averaged
Green’s function: this seems much harder than in dimension 2 essentially for
the same reason that BCS3 is much harder than BCS2: the random potential
viewed as a random matrix between angular directions is not of the usual
type (i.e. is not independent identically distributed, see [MPR2]). After that
difficulty has been solved, however, the task of controlling the square modulus of the Green’s function < G+ G− > should be easier than in dimension
8

2, since we expect diffusion rather than localization.
III.2.2

Constructive Study of Spin Glasses.

This area is not familiar to me, but it contains certainly very challenging
problems which do not often belong to the culture of main stream constructivists. To “solve” in a constructive sense models like the SherringtonKirckpatrik model is certainly an ambitious goal for the future. One should
understand the correct notion of states for the model (in particular in connexion with the ultrametric structure conjectured by the physicists). It would
be fascinating to also understand in a more precise and constructive sense
the replica symmetry breaking tool of Parisi. Recently an explicit formula
for the partition function at low temperature has been obtained [Kou].

III.3

Polymers

Polymers and self-avoiding walks (SAW) are related to zero-component field
theories and have been often studied by constructive theorists. Among the
established results are the works [A2][BS][HS][L][IM] which explore the behavior of these systems in 4 dimensions or more. Scaling dimensions of SAW
with specific interactions in two dimensions can also be studied rigorously
through conformal invariance. See [D] for a recent result in this area using
quantum gravity methods.
Here is a list of open problems:
III.3.1
Polymers with partly attractive interactions: prove that they scale to Brownian motion in d > 4, at least if the interaction is stable and small. Existence
of transitions when the interaction is stable but attractive?
III.3.2
d = 4 Self avoiding walk: find new proofs that the end-to-end distance has
an exponent of 1/2 with log corrections.

9

III.3.3
Find new proofs that random walk in random environment scales to Brownian
motion in d > 2.
III.3.4
Prove anything at all about the expected end-to end distance of a self avoiding
walk in d < 4. Is it greater than that of simple random walk? Does it have
an exponent? If it does, is the exponent different from 1/2?
III.3.5
Prove that the scaling limit of True Self Avoiding Walk in d > 2 is Brownian
Motion.

III.4

Interfaces, Wulff construction

The constructive study of functional integrals associated to interacting surfaces (Polyakov’s functional integral) is much harder than the ordinary random walk. The importance of these functional integrals (for instance in
string theory) nevertheless justify that constructivists should get interested
into them.
III.4.1

Wetting

The study of interfaces is more advanced for solid-on solid models than for
real models such as the Ising model in the two phase regime.
An important open problem is to construct the non-trivial renormalization group fixed point for a solid-on-solid model of an interface with two
competing exponentials. This should be doable at least in the regime where
this fixed point is closed to a Gaussian one, thanks to a small parameter in
the rate of the two exponentials [BHL].
An other important problem is to give rigorous meaning to the Wulff
construction for such models [DM].
There are also perturbative results on the renormalization surfaces interacting e.g. with a single impurity [DDG] which one would like to connect to
a constructive analysis.
10

III.5

Non Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics

The study of situations far from equilibrium made a big conceptual progress
with the introduction of the SRB steady states [SRB]. A typical recent rigorous result in this domain is the fluctuation theorem of Gallavotti and Cohen
[GC] on entropy production. See [G1] for a discussion of this result.
We remark that the quantum non-equilibrium statistical mechanics remain a widely open subject. An important long term goal for constructive
theory should be, after many body systems are better understood and the
main problems of the next section IV are solved, to develop the corresponding
theory near equilibrium, namley to put on a firm mathematical microscopic
analysis the Kubo formula and the Joule effect, and more generally transport
theory.

IV

Condensed Matter

In the constructive theory of condensed matter, the main event of the past
was the adaptation of renormalization group techniques to models with a
Fermi surface [BG][FT1-2][FMRT1-5].

IV.1

Interacting fermions in 2 dimensions

- In two dimensions there is a well-defined strategy which should lead ultimately to the complete construction of the BCS2 model, namely the control
of the BCS phase at zero temperature [FMRT5]. There exists already a control of the model until a scale where the coupling constant becomes small
but of order unity, which proves that any transition temperature has to be
exponentially small in the coupling [DR2-3]. Then the zone where the coupling constant is of order unity should be under control through some kind
of 1/N expansion, where here N is no longer an ad hoc parameter but is
the effective number of angular directions on the Fermi surface at the scale
considered [FMRT2]; this expansion is not easy to write, and one may start
with a simpler model which has only quartic interaction at the BCS scale,
like in [KMR]; then one has to glue this analysis to the previous one, hence
treat the corrections to the quartic effective action. Finally one has to control the distance scales much longer that the BCS scale, where the physics
is governed by the infrared singularity of the Goldstone boson. Here the
11

key tool should be a multiscale renormalization group analysis that relies on
Ward identities [FMRT4] like in [Ba2]. This is a long and difficult program
(even by the constructive standards!).

IV.2

Interacting fermions in 3 dimensions (BCS3)

In dimension 3 the BCS program is less advanced. Although perturbative
power counting for the Fermi liquid is independent of dimension, and the
Goldstone boson problem is easier in 3+1 than in 2+1 dimensions, the initial
regime (the equivalent of [FMRT1]-[DR2]) is harder to control for BCS3
because the momentum conservation laws are not as restrictive in 3 than
in 2 dimensions: vertices can be non-planar, or “twisted” in 3 dimensions
[FMRT3]. The only rigorous result so far is that the radius of convergence
of perturbation theory in a slice around the Fermi surface is independent
of the distance of that slice to the singularity [MR]). To find the analog of
[FMRT1][DR2], namely that the sum of all “convergent contributions” to the
theory is analytic in the coupling constant remains in our opinion a major
challenge of constructive theory.

IV.3

Bose-Einstein condensation

Develop the theory of Bose-Einstein condensation. This can be viewed as a
piece of the previous BCS program where the bosons are Cooper pairs, i.e.
bound states of Fermions, or as an independent program if the bosons are
given from the start (see [Be]).

IV.4

Non-Spherical Surfaces; Hubbard Model

IV.4.1
Treat non-spherical surfaces. After the work on the renormalization of convex
surfaces [FKLT][FST], treat surfaces with flat pieces and/or singular points:
the regular Hubbard model at half-filling on a square lattice has both these
features. Until now, this has to rely for at least some part on numerical
rather than analytical tools.

12

IV.4.2
Develop a rigorous non-perturbative mean-field theory for condensed matter,
i.e. develop the non-perturbative version of the dynamical mean-field or
d = ∞ limit of models such as the Hubbard model: this dynamical meanfield model is really a one dimensional theory with a self-consistent condition,
but without an explicit action [GKKR].

IV.5

Quasi-periodic potentials, quasi-crystals

Develop the mathematical theory of conduction in quasi-crystals.
In one dimension it is believed that fermions develop a Charge Density
Wave instability at small temperature with period equal to the inverse of
the density. An interesting goal is to prove the generation of such CDW in a
system of interacting Fermions. In this direction an expansion for interacting
Fermions with an incommensurate external potential satisfying a proper diophantine conditions was shown to converge in [Ma]; this is a first bridge on
the gap between solid state physics and classical mechanics (the KAM theorem below), since it amounts to solve a small denominator problem “with
loops”. It would be nice to extend this bridge to other models, in particular
in greater dimensions.

V

Classical Mechanics

Again this is an area I do not fell too competent to review and my remarks
will be brief. Contributions from constructive theorists have been devoted in
particular to the area of the KAM theorem, where in particular the Italian
school around G. Gallavotti has developed the renormalization group approach to the KAM theorem, but also to classical and quantum chaos, and
to classical mechanics in random environment.

V.1

KAM theory

Invariant tori in Hamiltonian systems analytically close to integrable systems
can be written as perturbative Lindstedt series in the perturbation parameter. A direct proof of the convergence of such series, done by Eliasson [E],
can be also obtained in the quantum field theory language, using multiscale
13

analysis as in the renormalization group, and cancellations [G2]. (These
cancellations can be interpreted as Ward identities related to translation invariance [BGK1]).
An interesting open question is what happens to Lindstedt series in the
non-analytic case. Moser, by using Nash theorem, proved that KAM tori
exist also in this case, with suitable conditions, but in general they are not
analytic. In [BGGM] analyticity was nevertheless proved for a class of nonanalytic pertubations by direct analysis of new cancellations in the Lindstedt
series. In more general cases where the summability of Lindstedt series may
fail it is an open question to know if some extended notion of summability,
like Borel summability (quite frequent in quantum field theory), may still
hold.
Another set of problems concern Arnold’s diffusion. In a priori unstable
systems, a key quantity is the splitting which is the determinant of a certain
matrix whose elements are series whose first order is exponentially small,
but the others are not. However the determinant itself is exponentially small
due to cancellations. Using Dyson equation for classical mechanics, Arnold
diffusion can be proved in certain a priori stable systems [GGM], but the
same question is open in general a priori stable systems such as those arising
from celestial mechanics.

V.2

Classical Chaos, Turbulence

Of course the solution of Navier-Stokes equation and their scaling laws remain a challenge, pretty much as it was at the beginning of the century.
In the fully developed turbulence, experimentally observed deviations from
Kolmogorov’s scaling of the velocity correlators signal a non-Gaussian character of the velocity distributions at short distances, called intermittency.
Such intermittency, or deviations from Kolmogorov’s scaling, has been more
or less understood in the particular case of the passive advection of a scalar
quantity (temperature, or density of a pollutant) by a random velocity field
[GK3][BGK2]. However an explanation of the origin of intermittency in the
general case of developed turbulence remains one of the main open problems
of theoretical hydrodynamics.

14

V.3

Quantum Chaos

Here let us mention the results [CRR] on the Gutzwiller trace formula, that
one would like to extend to longer time evolution. A main challenge is to put
the heuristic connection between quantum chaos and the spectra of random
matrices on a mathematically rigorous footing.

V.4

Partial Differential Equations and Renormalization

I would like to cite the work of Bricmont and Kupiainen on random walks in
a random environment [BK1], and more generally the application of renormalization group methods to partial differential equations [BK2].
The major open problems listed in [BK2] are the study of stability of
fronts in dissipative equations; extension of renormalization group methods to
hyperbolic equations; the study of invariant measures for dynamical systems
called Coupled Map Lattices [Ka], and of nonequilibrium “phase transitions”
in which these invariant measures change as the coupling is varied.

VI

Improving Constructive Techniques

In this section we would like to gather some list of mathematical techniques
which are quite general, so that they ought to be useful not only for a single
problem but for many models in different branches of physics.

VI.1

Renormalization Group

A central problem in constructive theory is to simplify and further rationalize the various techniques which allow to perform rigorous Renormalization
Group computations. The inductive version of the renormalization group
itself has been better formalized by Brydges and coworkers [Br]; the multiscale phase space expansions which are some kind of expanded solution of
the renormalization group induction have been also recently formalized more
explicitly [AR], and also recast using wavelets [Bat]. These efforts should
be continued if we want the rigorous approach to become part of the regular cursus of field theory. An open problem which could be mentioned along
15

these lines is to find an inductive rigorous constructive renormalization which
would be as simple as Polchinski’s induction for perturbative renormalization
[P]: even for Fermions, this remains an open problem [S2][DR1].

VI.2

Gluing together various expansions

Techniques to glue together different expansions or different regimes of the
renormalization group (e.g small coupling/1/N coupling) should be developed. This is a condition to treat many interesting models with “nonperturbative” phases. Somewhat like the geometric description of non-trivial
manifolds requires to glue several local charts together, the construction of
non-trivial models with non-perturbative effects requires to develop some
experience in such gluing operations (see II.2.1).
In a similar vein it is interesting to combine together several expansion
techniques which are usually treated separately. For instance one can study
the Many Body Models of section IV with the additional complication of
random or quasi-periodic environment (see [Ma] for a one-dimensional example).

VI.3

Symmetries and Ward identities

Many difficult constructive problems involve symmetries which are crucial to
their understanding (gauge symmetries, supersymmetry, replica symmetry).
One would like to have more general methods to quotient out or break these
symmetries, and develop a more general theory of non-perturbative Ward
identities.

VI.4

Non-integer dimensions

Non-integer dimensions is an interesting perturbative tool (e.g. for the renormalization of non-Abelian gauge fields or for the ǫ expansion in statistical mechanics) that has no constructive analog. One should understand
why and build the non-perturbative theory of functional integration in noninteger dimensions. This is a long-term difficult goal, perhaps related to
non-commutative geometry, where ordinary space is lost and the ordinary
algebra of functions is replaced by a non-commutative algebra.

16

VI.5

Random Matrices

Random matrices is a powerful tool for a wide range of physical problems,
from nuclear physics to quantum chaos, localization, quantized gravity and
M-theory. The classical theory is the theory of independent identically distributed random matrices, and relates them to orthogonal polynomials and
integrable PDE’s [M]. An important progress may come from the understanding of random matrices with non-independent coefficients. In the point
of view of Voiculescu [V], the Wigner law for independent identically distributed matrices model is the non-commutative analog of Gaussian integration. Constructivists, just as they developed the theory of non-Gaussian
functional integration, may therefore try to develop a more general theory of
random matrices, including in particular those with constraints of geometric
origin (see eg [MPR2] for an example). This could presumably be very useful for the physics in spatial dimensions higher than 2 (condensed matter,
scattering, phase transitions).

VII

String Theory and Conclusion

When the constructive field theory program began in the 60’s, field theory
was the prominent candidate for a fundamental theory of nature at the microscopic level (although it did not include quantization of gravity). Today
the main stream of theoretical physics holds the view that field theory is only
an effective theory and that superstring or M-theory is the best candidate
for a fundamental global theory of nature, a “theory of everything”. Even if
on a philosophical level the very existence of such a final theory is dubious,
it is certainly a fascinating dream. So in order to remain faithful to its initial
quest, one could ask whether constructivists should not join the efforts to
find and build this TOE?
I would be tempted to adopt a rather cautious answer to this question,
namely “Perhaps, but not yet”. There are three reasons for this cautious
attitude.
- String theory or M-theory are mathematically very difficult: even the
perturbative theory of superstring amplitudes contain enormous difficulties:
a proof of finiteness e.g. of the 10-dimensional E8 × E8 heterotic superstring
amplitudes is a very difficult program in itself.
17

- The theory is in such a state of rapid evolution that it is not clear what
should really be built. In the recent years, the different models had a rather
short life time before they were absorbed in a more general formalism. Under
such circumstances, to launch a major constructive effort could be premature,
since the model might be outdated well before the rigorous construction is
completed.
- The theory has not yet received direct experimental confirmation. We
can at best hope for indirect hints, which may come in the next decades
(spatial experiments such as those probing the background cosmic radiation,
large cosmic rays detectors, new accelerators such as the LHC, etc. . . may
select along various cosmological or high energy scenarii, and give indirect
support to such or such models).
For these three reasons I do not think that time is ripe to launch today
“constructive string theory”, as “constructive field theory” was launched by
A. Wightman and followers in the 60’s.
To soften slightly these remarks, let me add that of course I consider
string theory extremely important for the future of mathematical physics.
Indeed string theory has not only been a very successful motivation to attract some of the best minds to theoretical physics and to lead them to
brilliant insights; it has also opened up a new interface with mathematicians,
mostly centered around geometry (differential, symplectic and algebraic geometry, mirror symmetry, quantum cohomology, knot theory, ...). However
this rapidly growing interface is very different from the one opened in the
past by constructive theory. Algebra and geometry dominate over analysis,
and there are no longer precise programs centered around axioms; but various
pieces of the theory and various cross-consistent results emerge progressively
from this interaction between mathematicians and theoretical physicists.
In conclusion, although at the present stage I would still rather personally
favor the applications of constructive field theory methods to well established
physics, I would be happy, when some of the dust has settled, to see new
generations of mathematical physicists attack in the constructive spirit the
problem of building rigorously the high energy models that will emerge and
survive in the coming century.

References
[A1] M. Aizenman, Geometric Analysis of φ4 fields and Ising models, Comm.
Math. Phys. 86, 1 (1982).

18

[A2] M. Aizenman, Comm. Math. Phys. 97, 91 (1985).
[AR] A. Abdesselam and V. Rivasseau, An Explicit Large Versus Small Field Multiscale Cluster Expansion, Rev. Math. Phys. Vol. 9 No 2, 123 (1997).
[Ba1] T. Balaban, Comm. Math. Phys. 95, 17 and 96, 223 (1984); 98, 17, 99, 75,
99, 389 and 102, 277 (1985); 109, 249 (1987); 116, 1 and 119, 243 (1988); 122,
175 and 122, 355 (1989).
[Ba2] T. Balaban, Comm. Math. Phys. 167 103 (1995); 175, 607 (1996); 182, 33
(1996); 182, 675 (1997); 196, 485 198, 1 and 198, 493 (1998).
[Bat] G. Battle, Wavelets and Renormalization, World Scientific, 1998.
[Be] G. Benfatto, Renormalization Group approach to Zero Temperature Bose Condensation, in [CP].
[BF] D. Brydges and P. Federbush, Debye Screening, Comm. Math. Phys. 73,
197 (1980).
[BG] G. Benfatto and G. Gallavotti, Perturbation theory of the Fermi surface in a
quantum liquid. A general quasi particle formalism and one dimensional systems,
Journ. Stat. Phys. 59 (1990) 541.
[BGGM] F. Bonetto, G. Gallavotti, G. Gentile and V. Mastropietro, Quasi linear
flows on tori and regularity of their linearization, Comm. Math. Phys. 192, 707
(1998).
[BGK1] J. Bricmont, K. Gawedzki and A. Kupiainen, Field Theory and KAM tori,
Comm. Math. Phys. 201, 699 (1999).
[BGK2] D. Bernard, K. Gawedzki and A. Kupiainen, Anomalous Scaling in the
N-point functions of a Passive Scalar, Phys. Rev. E54, 2564 (1996).
[BK1] J. Bricmont and A. Kupiainen, Random walks in asymmetric random environments, Comm. Math. Phys. 142, 345 (1991).
[BK2] J. Bricmont and A. Kupiainen, Renormalizing Partial Differential Equations, in [CP].
[BHL] E. Br´ezin, B. I. Halperin and S. Leibler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1387 (1983).
[BM] D. Brydges and Ph. Martin, Coulomb Systems at low density, to appear in
Journ. Stat. Phys.
[BPZ] Belavin, Polyakov and Zamolodchikov, Nucl. Phys. B241, 333 (1984)
[Br] D. Brydges, Weak perturbations of the Massless Gaussian Measure, in [CP].
[BS] D. Brydges and T. Spencer, Comm. Math. Phys. 97, 125 (1985).
[BV] D. Buchholz and R. Verch, Rev. Math. Phys. 7, 1195 (1995)

19

[CP] Constructive Physics, ed by V. Rivasseau, Lecture Notes in Physics 446,
Springer Verlag, 1995.
[CRR] M. Combescure, J. Ralston and D. Robert, A proof of the Gutzwiller semiclassical trace formula using coherent states decomposition, Comm. Math. Phys.
202, 463 (1999)
[D] B. Duplantier, Random Walks, Polymers, Percolation and Quantum Gravity
in Two Dimensions, Physica A 263, 452 (1999).
[dCFdVMS] de Calan, C., Faria da Veiga, P.A., Magnen, J., S´en´eor, R.: Constructing the Three Dimensional Gross-Neveu Model with a Large Number of Flavor
Components, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 3233-3236 (1991).
[DDG] F. David, B. Duplantier and E. Guitter, Renormalization Theory for the
Self-Avoiding Polymerized Membranes, cond-mat/9702136.
[DFR] F. David, J. Feldman and V. Rivasseau On the large order behavior of φ44 ,
Comm. Math. Phys. 116, 215 (1988).
[DM] F. Dunlop and J. Magnen, A Wulff Shape from Constructive Field Theory,
in Mathematical Results in Statistical Mechanics, World Scientific, 1998.
[DR1] M. Disertori and V. Rivasseau, Continuous Constructive Fermionic Renormalization, hep-th/9802145, to appear in Annales Henri Poincar´e.
[DR2] M. Disertori and V. Rivasseau, Interacting Fermi liquid in two dimensions
at finite temperature, Part I: Convergent Attributions, cond-mat/9907130.
[DR3] M. Disertori and V. Rivasseau, Interacting Fermi liquid in two dimensions
at finite temperature, Part II: Renormalization, cond-mat/9907131.
[dV] P. Faria da Veiga, Construction de Mod`eles Non Perturbativement Renormalisables en Th´eorie Quantique des Champs, Th`ese, Universit´e de Paris XI, 1992;
[E] L.H. Eliasson, Absolutely convergent series expansions for quasi-periodic motions, Math. Phys. Elec. Journal, 2, 1996.
[EMS] J.P. Eckmann, J. Magnen and R. S´en´eor, Decay properties and Borel summability for the Schwinger functions in P (φ)2 theories, Comm. Math. Phys. 39, 251
(1975).
[Er] Constructive Quantum field theory, Proceedings of the 1973 Erice Summer
School, ed. by G. Velo and A. Wightman, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 25,
Springer 1973.
[Fe] J. Feldman, The λφ43 field theory in a finite volume, Comm. Math. Phys. 37,
93 (1974).
[Fr] J. Fr¨
ohlich, On the triviality of λφ4d theories and the approach to the critical
point in d ≥ 4 dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B200 (FS4), 281 (1982).

20

[FKLT] J. Feldman, H. Kn¨
orrer, D. Lehmann and E. Trubowitz, Fermi Liquids in
Two Space Time Dimensions, in [CP].
[FMRS1] J. Feldman, J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and R. S´en´eor, A renormalizable
field theory: the massive Gross-Neveu model in two dimensions, Comm. Math.
Phys. 103, 67 (1986).
[FMRT1] J. Feldman, J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and E. Trubowitz, An infinite
Volume Expansion for Many Fermion Green’s Functions, Helv. Phys. Acta 65
(1992) 679.
[FMRT2] J. Feldman, J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and E. Trubowitz, An Intrinsic
1/N Expansion for Many Fermion System, Europhys. Letters 24, 437 (1993).
[FMRT3] J. Feldman, J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and E. Trubowitz, Two dimensional Many Fermion Systems as Vector Models, Europhys. Letters 24, 521 (1993).
[FMRT4] J. Feldman, J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and E. Trubowitz, Ward Identities and a Perturbative Analysis of a U(1) Goldstone Boson in a Many Fermion
System, Helv. Phys. Acta 66, 498 (1993).
[FMRT5] J. Feldman, J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and E. Trubowitz, A Rigorous
Analysis of the Superconducting Phase of an Electron-Phonon System, Proceedings
de l’Ecole des Houches 1994 (F. David, P. Ginsparg eds.
[FO] J. Feldman and K. Osterwalder, The Wightman axioms and the mass gap for
weakly coupled φ43 quantum field theories, Ann. Phys. 97, 80 (1976).
[FS1] J. Fr¨
ohlich and T. Spencer, The Kosterlitz-Thouless Transition in TwoDimensional Abelian Spin Systems and the Coulomb Gas, Comm. Math. Phys.
81, 527 (1981).
[FS2] J. Fr¨
ohlich and T. Spencer, Absence of diffusion in the Anderson tight binding
model for large disorder or low energy, Comm. Math. Phys. 88, 151 (1983).
[FST] J. Feldman, M. Salmhofer and E. Trubowitz, Perturbation Theory around
Non-nested Fermi Surfaces II. Regularity of the Moving Fermi Surface, RPA Contributions, Comm. Pure. Appl. Math. 51 (1998) 1133; Regularity of the Moving
Fermi Surface, The Full Selfenergy, to appear in Comm. Pure. Appl. Math.
[FT1] J. Feldman and E. Trubowitz, Perturbation theory for Many Fermion Systems, Helv. Phys. Acta 63 (1991) 156.
[FT2] J. Feldman and E. Trubowitz, The flow of an Electron-Phonon System to
the Superconducting State, Helv. Phys. Acta 64 (1991) 213.
[G1] G. Gallavotti, A local Fluctuation Theorem, Physica A 263, 39 (1999).
[G2] G. Gallavotti, Twistless KAM tori, quasi flat homoclinic intersections, and
other cancellations in the perturbation series of certain completely integrable Hamil-

21

tonian systems. A review, Reviews on Mathematical Physics 6, 343 (1994).
[GC] G. Gallavotti and E.G.D. Cohen, Dynamical ensembles in nonequilibrium
statistical mechanics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2694 (1995); Dynamical ensembles in
stationary states, Journ. Stat. Phys. 80, 931 (1995).
[GGM] G. Gallavotti, G. Gentile and V. Mastropietro, Hamilton-Jacobi equation
and existence of heteroclinic chains in three time scales systems (to appear on
Nonlinearity).
[GJ1] J. Glimm and A. Jaffe, “Quantum Physics. A functional integral point of
view”, Mc Graw and Hill, New York, 1981
[GJ2] J. Glimm and A. Jaffe, Positivity of the φ43 Hamiltonian, Fortschr. Phys.
21, 327 (1973).
[GJS1] J. Glimm, A. Jaffe and T. Spencer, The Wightman Axioms and Particle
Structure in the P (φ)2 Quantum Field Model, Ann. Math. 100, 585 (1974).
[GJS2] J. Glimm, A. Jaffe and T. Spencer, Phase transitions for φ42 Quantum
Fields, Comm. Math. Phys. 45, 203 (1975).
[GK1] K. Gawedzki and A. Kupiainen, Gross-Neveu model through convergent
perturbation expansions, Comm. Math. Phys. 102, 1 (1985).
[GK2] K. Gawedzki and A. Kupiainen, Comtinuum limit of the hierarchical O(N )
nonlinear σ model, Comm. Math. Phys. 106, 533 (1986).
[GK3] K. Gawedzki and A. Kupiainen, Anomalous Scaling of the Passive Scalar,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3834 (1995).
[GKKR] A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth and M. Rozenberg, The Local Impurity
Self-Consistent Approximation to Strongly Correlated Fermion Systems and the
Limit of Infinite Dimensions, Rev. Mod. Physics, 68, 13 (1996).
[HS] T. Hara and G. Slade, Comm. Math. Phys. 147, 101 (1992).
[Ia] D. Iagolnitzer, Scattering in Quantum Field Theories, Princeton University
Press, 1992.
[Im] J. Imbrie, The Ground State of the Three Dimensional Random Field Ising
Model, Comm. Math. Phys. 98, 145 (1985).
[IM] D. Iagolnitzer and J. Magnen, Polymers in a Weak Random Potential in
Dimension 4: Rigorous Renormalization Group Analysis, Comm. Math. Phys.
162, 85 (1994).
[IT] K.R. Ito and H. Tamura, N -dependence of upper bounds of critical temperatures of 2d O(N) spin models, Comm. Math. Phys. 202, 127 (1999).
[K] C. Kopper, Mass Generation in the large N non-linear sigma Model, Comm.
Math. Phys. 202, 89 (1999).

22

[Ka] K. Kaneko, Theory and Applications of Coupled Map Lattices, Wiley, (1993).
[KMR] C. Kopper, J. Magnen and V. Rivasseau, Mass Generation in the Large N
Gross-Neveu Model, Comm. Math. Phys. 169, 121 (1995)
[Kou] F. Koukiou, Large deviations for the mean behaviour of the SherringtonKirkpatrick spin glass model, to appear in Comm. Math. Phys. (1999).
[M] M. L. Mehta, Random Matrices and the Statistical Theory of Energy Levels,
Academic Press 1967.
[Ma] V. Mastropietro, Small Denominators and Anomalous Behaviour in the Incommensurate Hubbard-Holstein Model, Comm. Math. Phys. 201, 81 (1999).
[MPR1] J. Magnen, G. Poirot and V. Rivasseau, Ward type Identities for the 2d
Anderson Model at weak Disorder, Journ. Stat. Phys. 93, 331 (1998)
[MPR2] J. Magnen, G. Poirot and V. Rivasseau, The Anderson Model as a Matrix
Model, Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 58, 149 (1997).
[MR] J. Magnen and V. Rivasseau, A Single Scale Infinite Volume Expansion for
Three Dimensional Many Fermion Green’s Functions, Math. Phys. Electronic
Journal, 1, 1995.
[MS] J. Magnen and R. S´en´eor, Phase space cell expansion and Borel summability
for the Euclidean φ43 theory, Comm Math. Phys. 56, 237 (1977).
[MRS] J. Magnen, V. Rivasseau and R. S´en´eor, Construction of Y M4 with an
infrared cutoff, Commun. Math. Phys. 155, 325 (1993).
[P] J. Polchinski, Nucl Phys B 231, 269 (1984)
[Pa] V. Pasquier, Two dimensional critical systems labelled by Dynkin diagrams,
Nucl. Phys. B285, [FS19] 162 (1986)
[OS] K. Osterwalder and R. Schrader, Axioms for Euclidean Green’s functions,
Comm. Math. Phys. 31, 83 (1973).
[R] V. Rivasseau, From perturbative to constructive renormalization, Princeton
University Press, 1991.
[Si] B. Simon, The P (φ)2 (Euclidean) Quantum field theory, Princeton University
Press, 1974.
[S1] M. Salmhofer, Improved Power Counting and Fermi Surface Renormalization,
Rev. Math. Phys. 10, 553 (1998).
[S2] M. Salmhofer, Continuous renormalization for Fermions and Fermi liquid
theory, Commun. Math. Phys.194, 249 (1998).
[SRB] Y. Sinai, Gibbsian measures in ergodic theory, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk 27 no 4,
21 (1972); R. Bowen and D. Ruelle, The ergodic theory of Axiom A flows, Invent.

23

Math. 29, 181 (1975); D. Ruelle, A measure associated with Axiom A attractors,
Am. J. Math. 98, 619 (1976).
[V] D. Voiculescu, Limit Laws for random Matrices and Free Products, Invent.
Math. 104, 201 (1991).
[W1] E. Witten, Some Questions for Constructive Field Theorists, in [CP].
[W2] E. Witten, Phases of N = 2 Models in two Dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B403,
159, (1993)
[Wi] A. Wightman, Quantum field theory in terms of vacuum expectation values,
Phys. Rev. 101, 860 (1956)
[Z] Y. Zinoviev, Equivalence of Euclidean and Wightman Field Theories, in [CP].

24

