Library Design in Combinatorial Chemistry by Monte Carlo Methods
Marco Falcioni and Michael W. Deem

arXiv:cond-mat/0007114v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 6 Jul 2000

Chemical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095–1592
Strategies for searching the space of variables in combinatorial chemistry experiments are presented,
and a random energy model of combinatorial chemistry experiments is introduced. The search
strategies, derived by analogy with the computer modeling technique of Monte Carlo, effectively
search the variable space even in combinatorial chemistry experiments of modest size. Efficient
implementations of the library design and redesign strategies are feasible with current experimental
capabilities.
02.50.Ng, 05.10.Ln, 82.90.+j

purity level can greatly affect the figure of merit [16]. In
addition, the “crystallinity” of the material can affect the
observed figure of merit [17]. Finally, the method of nucleation or synthesis may affect the phase or morphology
of the material and so affect the figure of merit [19].
We assume that the composition and non-composition
variables of each sample can be changed independently
[1,14]. Then, instead of a grid search on the composition
and non-composition variables, we consider choosing the
variables at random from the allowed values. We also
consider choosing the variables in a fashion that attempts
to maximize the amount of information gained from the
limited number of samples screened, via a quasi-random,
low-discrepancy sequence [20].
We further consider performing multiple rounds of
screening, incorporating feedback as the experiment proceeds by treating the combinatorial chemistry experiment
as a Monte Carlo in the laboratory. This leads to sampling the experimental figure of merit, E, proportional
to exp(βE). If β is large, then the Monte Carlo procedure will seek out values of the composition and noncomposition variables that maximize the figure of merit.
If β is too large, however, the Monte Carlo procedure
will get stuck in relatively low-lying local maxima. The
first round is initiated by choosing the composition and
non-composition variables at random from the allowed
values. The variables are changed in succeeding rounds
as dictated by the Monte Carlo procedure.
Two ways of changing the variables are considered:
randomly changing the variables of a randomly chosen
sample a small amount and exchanging a subset of the
variables between two randomly chosen samples. These
moves are repeated until all the samples in a round have
been modified. The values of the figure of merit for the
proposed new samples are then measured. Whether to
accept the newly proposed samples or to keep the current
samples for the next round is decided according to the
detailed balance acceptance criterion. For the random
change of one sample, we find the Metropolis acceptance
probability:

I. INTRODUCTION

The goal of combinatorial materials discovery is to find
compositions of matter that maximize a specific material property [1–3], such as superconductivity [4], magnetoresistance [5], luminescence [6–8], ligand specificity
[9], sensor response [10], or catalytic activity [2,11–16].
This problem can be reformulated as one of searching
a multi-dimensional space, with the material composition, impurity levels, and synthesis conditions as variables. The property to be optimized, the figure of merit,
is generally an unknown function of the variables and can
be measured only experimentally.
Present approaches to combinatorial library design and
screening invariably perform a grid search in composition
space, followed by a “steepest-ascent” maximization of
the figure of merit. This procedure becomes inefficient in
high-dimensional spaces or when the figure of merit is not
a smooth function of the variables, and its use has limited
most combinatorial chemistry experiments to ternary or
quaternary compounds.
In this paper, we suggest new experimental protocols for searching the space of variables in combinatorial
chemistry, exploiting an analogy between combinatorial
materials discovery and Monte Carlo computer modeling methods. In Section II we discuss several of these
strategies for library design and redesign. In Section III
we introduce the Random Phase Volume Model that we
will use to compare the different methods. The effectiveness of different strategies is discussed in Section IV. We
conclude in Section V.

II. SAMPLING THE SPACE OF VARIABLES IN
MATERIALS DISCOVERY

Several variables can be manipulated in order to seek
the material with the optimal figure of merit. Material
composition is certainly a variable. But also, film thickness [17] and deposition method [18] are variables for
materials made in thin film form. The processing history, such as temperature, pressure, pH, and atmospheric
composition, is a variable. The guest composition or im-

acc(c → p) = min {1, exp [β (Eproposed − Ecurrent )]} .
(1)

1

Proposed samples that increase the figure of merit are always accepted; proposed samples that decrease the figure
of merit are accepted with the Metropolis probability. Allowing the figure of merit occasionally to decrease is what
allows samples to escape from local maxima. The random
displacement of the d mole fraction variables, xi , is done
in the (d − 1)-dimensional subspace orthogonal to the ddimensional vector (1, 1, . . . , 1). This procedure ensures
d
that the constraint
i=1 xi = 1 is maintained. This
subspace is identified by the Gram-Schmidt procedure.
Moves that violate the constraint xi ≥ 0 are rejected.
Moves that lead to invalid values of the non-composition
variables are also rejected. For the swapping move applied to samples i and j, we find the modified acceptance
probability:

tial library of samples, measuring the initial figures of
merit, changing the variables of each sample a small random amount or swapping subsets of the variables between
pairs of samples, constructing the proposed new library
of samples, measuring the figures of merit of the proposed new samples, accepting or rejecting each of the proposed new samples, and performing parallel tempering
exchanges. Following rounds of combinatorial chemistry
repeat these steps, starting with making changes to the
current values of the composition and non-composition
variables. These steps are repeated for as many rounds
as desired, or until maximal figures of merit are found.
We have chosen to sample the figure of merit by Monte
Carlo, rather than to optimize it globally by some other
method, for several reasons. First, Monte Carlo is an
effective stochastic optimization method. Second, simple global optimization may be misleading since concerns
such as patentability, cost of materials, and ease of synthesis are not usually included in the experimental figure
of merit. Moreover, the screen that is most easily performed in the laboratory, the “primary screen,” is usually
only roughly correlated with the true figure of merit. Indeed, after finding materials that look promising based
upon the primary screen, experimental secondary and
tertiary screens are usually performed to identify that
material which is truly optimal. Third, it might be advantageous to screen for several figures of merit at once.
For all of these reasons, sampling by Monte Carlo to produce several candidate materials is preferred over global
optimization.

j
i
acc(c → p) = min 1, exp β Eproposed
+ Eproposed
j
i
− Ecurrent
− Ecurrent

. (2)

Fig. 1a shows one round of a Monte Carlo procedure.
The parameter β is not related to the thermodynamic
temperature of the experiment and should be optimized
for best efficiency. The characteristic sizes of the random
changes in the composition and non-composition variables are also parameters that should be optimized.
If the number of composition and non-composition
variables is too great, or if the figure of merit changes
with the variables in a too-rough fashion, normal Monte
Carlo will not achieve effective sampling. Parallel tempering is a natural extension of Monte Carlo that is used
to study statistical [21], spin glass [22], and molecular [23]
systems with rugged energy landscapes. Our most powerful protocol incorporates the method of parallel tempering for changing the system variables. In parallel tempering, a fraction of the samples are updated by Monte
Carlo with parameter β1 , a fraction by Monte Carlo with
parameter β2 , and so on. At the end of each round, samples are randomly exchanged between the groups with
different β’s, as shown in Fig. 1b. The acceptance probability for exchanging two samples is
acc(c → p) = min {1, exp [∆β∆E]} ,

III. THE RANDOM PHASE VOLUME MODEL

The effectiveness of these protocols is demonstrated
by combinatorial chemistry experiments as simulated by
the Random Phase Volume Model. The Random Phase
Volume Model is not fundamental to the protocols; it is
introduced as a simple way to test, parameterize, and
validate the various searching methods. The model relates the figure of merit to the composition and noncomposition variables in a statistical way. The model
is fast enough to allow for validation of the proposed
searching methods on an enormous number of samples,
yet possesses the correct statistics for the figure-of-merit
landscape. The d-dimensional vector of composition mole
fractions is denoted by x. The composition mole fractions
are non-negative and sum to unity, and so the allowed
compositions are constrained to lie within a simplex in d
dimensions. For the familiar ternary system, this simplex
is an equilateral triangle. The composition variables are
grouped into phases centered around Nx points xα randomly placed within the allowed composition range (the
phases form a Voronoi diagram [24], see Fig. 2). The
model is defined for any number of composition variables,
and the number of phase points is defined by requiring

(3)

where ∆β is the difference in the values of β between
the two groups, and ∆E is the difference in the figures
of merit between the two samples. It is important to
notice that this exchange step does not involve any extra screening compared to Monte Carlo and is, therefore,
“free” in terms of experimental costs. This step is, however, dramatically effective at facilitating the protocol to
escape from local maxima. The number of different systems and the temperatures of each system are parameters
that must be optimized.
To summarize, the first round of combinatorial chemistry consists of the following steps: constructing the ini2

The total number of samples whose figure of merit will
be measured is fixed at M = 100, 000, so that all protocols have the same experimental cost. The single pass
protocols Grid, Random, and LDS are considered. For
the Grid method, we define Mx = M (d−1)/(d−1+b) and
Mz = M b/(d−1+b) . The grid spacing of the composition
1/(d−1)
variables is ζx = (Vd /Mx )
, where
√
d
Vd =
(6)
(d − 1)!

the average spacing between phase points to be ξ = 0.25.
To avoid edge effects, additional points are added in a
belt of width 2ξ around the simplex of allowed compositions. The figure of merit should change dramatically between composition phases. Moreover, within each phase
α, the figure of merit should also vary with y = x − xα
due to crystallinity effects such as crystallite size, intergrowths, defects, and faulting [17]. In addition, the noncomposition variables should also affect the measured figure of merit. The non-composition variables are denoted
by the b-dimensional vector z, with each component constrained to fall within the range [−1, 1] without loss of
generality. There can be any number of non-composition
variables. The figure of merit depends on the composition and non-composition variables in a correlated fashion, and so the non-composition variables also fall within
Nz “z-phases” defined in the space of composition variables. There are a factor of 10 fewer non-composition
phases than composition phases. The functional form of
the model when x is in composition phase α and noncomposition-phase γ is

is the volume of the allowed composition simplex. Note
that the distance from the centroid of the simplex to the
closest point on the boundary of the simplex is
1
.
(7)
Rd =
1/2
[d(d − 1)]

The spacing for each component of the non-composition
1/b
variables is ζz = 2/Mz . For the LDS method, different quasi-random sequences are used for the composition
and non-composition variables. The feedback protocols
Monte Carlo, Monte Carlo with swap, and Parallel Tempering are considered. The Monte Carlo parameters were
optimized on test cases. It was optimal to perform 100
rounds of 1,000 samples with β = 2 for d = 3 and β = 1
for d = 4 or 5, and ∆x = 0.1Rd and ∆z = 0.12 for
the maximum random displacement in each component.
The swapping move consisted of an attempt to swap all
of the non-composition values between the two chosen
samples, and it was optimal to use Pswap ≃ 0.1 for the
probability of a swap versus a regular random displacement. For Parallel Tempering it was optimal to perform
100 rounds with 1,000 samples, divided into three subsets: 50 samples at β1 = 50, 500 samples at β2 = 10,
and 450 samples at β3 = 1. The 50 samples at large β
essentially perform a “steepest-ascent” optimization and
have smaller ∆x = 0.01Rd and ∆z = 0.012.
The figures of merit found by the protocols are shown
in Fig. 3. The Random and LDS protocols find better solutions than does Grid in one round of experiment. More
importantly, the Monte Carlo methods have a tremendous advantage over one pass methods, especially as the
number of variables increases, with Parallel Tempering
the best method. The Monte Carlo methods, in essence,
gather more information about how best to search the
variable space with each succeeding round. This feedback
mechanism proves to be effective even for the relatively
small total sample size of 100,000 considered here. We
expect that the advantage of the Monte Carlo methods
will become even greater for larger sample sizes. Note
that in cases such as catalytic activity, sensor response,
or ligand specificity [25], the experimental figure of merit
would likely be exponential in the values shown in Fig. 3,
so that the success of the Monte Carlo methods would be
even more dramatic. A better calibration of the parameters in Eq. 4 may be possible as more data becomes
available in the literature.

E(x, z) = Uα
q

d
(αk)

fi1 ...ik ξx−k Ai1 ...ik yi1 yi2 . . . yik

+σx
k=1

+

i1 ≥...≥ik =1

1
Wγ
2
q

b
(γk)

fi1 ...ik ξz−k Bi1 ...ik zi1 zi2 . . . zik , (4)

+σz
k=1

i1 ≥...≥ik =1

where fi1 ...ik is a constant symmetry factor, ξx and ξz are
(αk)
(γk)
constant scale factors, and Uα , Wγ , Ai1 ...ik , and Bi1 ...ik
are random Gaussian variables with unit variance. In
more detail, the symmetry factor is given by
fi1 ...ik =

k!
l
i=1

oi !

,

(5)

where l is the number of distinct integer values in the set
{i1 , . . . , ik }, and oi is the number of times that distinct
value i is repeated in the set. Note that 1 ≤ l ≤ k and
l
i=1 oi = k. The scale factors are chosen so that each
term in the multinomial contributes roughly the same
amount: ξx = ξ/2 and ξz = ( z 6 / z 2 )1/4 = (3/7)1/4 .
The σx and σz are chosen so that the multinomial, crystallinity terms contribute 40% as much as the constant,
phase terms on average. For both multinomials q = 6.
As Fig. 2 shows, the Random Phase Volume Model describes a rugged figure of merit landscape, with subtle
variations, local maxima, and discontinuous boundaries.
IV. RESULTS

Six different search protocols are tested with increasing
numbers of composition and non-composition variables.
3

[11] F. M. Menger, A. V. Eliseev, and V. A. Migulin, J. Org.
Chem. 60, 6666 (1995).
[12] K. Burgess, H.-J. Lim, A. M. Porte, and G. A. Sulikowski,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 35, 220 (1996).
[13] B. M. Cole, K. D. Shimizu, C. A. Krueger, J. P. A. Harrity, M. L. Snapper, and A. H. Hoveyda, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 35, 1668 (1996).
[14] D. E. Akporiaye, I. M. Dahl, A. Karlsson, and R. Wendelbo, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 37, 609 (1998).
[15] E. Reddington, A. Sapienza, B. Gurau, R. Viswanathan,
S. Sarangapani, E. S. Smotkin, and T. E. Mallouk, Science 280, 1735 (1998).
[16] P. Cong, R. D. Doolen, Q. Fan, D. M. Giaquinta, S.
Guan, E. W. McFarland, D. M. Poojary, K. Self, H. W.
Turber, and W. H. Weinberg, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 38,
484 (1999).
[17] R. B. van Dover, L. F. Schneemeyer, and R. M. Fleming,
Nature 392, 162 (1998).
[18] T. Novet, D. C. Johnson, and L. Fister, Adv. Chem. Ser.
245, 425 (1995).
[19] S. I. Zones, Y. Nakagawa, G. S. Lee, C. Y. Chen, and L.
T. Yuen, Micropor. Mesopor. Mat. 21, 199 (1998).
[20] P. Bratley, B. L. Fox, and H. Niederreiter, ACM Trans.
Math. Software 20, 494 (1994).
[21] C. J. Geyer, in Computing Science and Statistics: Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium on the Interface (American Statistical Association, New York, 1991), pp. 156–
163.
[22] E. Marinari, G. Parisi, and J. Ruiz-Lorenzo, in Spin
Glasses and Random Fields, Vol. 12 of Directions in Condensed Matter Physics, edited by A. Young (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), pp. 59–98.
[23] M. Falcioni and M. W. Deem, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 1754
(1999).
[24] R. Sedgewick, Algorithms, 2 ed. (Addison-Wesley, New
York, 1988), Chap. 28, p. 408.
[25] L. D. Bogarad and M. W. Deem, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 96, 2591 (1999).

V. CONCLUSION

To conclude, the experimental challenges in combinatorial chemistry appear to lie mainly in the screening
methods and in the technology for the creation of the
libraries. The theoretical challenges, on the other hand,
appear to lie mainly in the library design and redesign
strategies. We have addressed this second question via
an analogy with Monte Carlo computer simulation, and
we have introduced the Random Phase Volume Model to
compare various strategies. We find the multiple-round,
Monte Carlo protocols to be especially effective on the
more difficult systems with larger numbers of composition and non-composition variables.
An efficient implementation of the search strategy is
feasible with existing library creation technology. Moreover “closing the loop” between library design and redesign is achievable with the same database technology
currently used to track and record the data from combinatorial chemistry experiments. These multiple-round
protocols, when combined with appropriate robotic controls, should allow the practical application of combinatorial chemistry to more complex and interesting systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation through grant number CTS–9702403.

[1] M. C. Pirrung, Chem. Rev. 97, 473 (1997).
[2] W. H. Weinberg, B. Jandeleit, K. Self, and H. Turner,
Curr. Opin. Chem. Bio. 3, 104 (1998).
[3] E. W. McFarland and W. H. Weinberg, TIBTECH 17,
107 (1999).
[4] X.-D. Xiang, X. Sun, G. Brice˜
no, Y. Lou, K.-A. Wang,
H. Chang, W. G. Wallace-Freedman, S.-W. Chang, and
P. G. Schultz, Science 268, 1738 (1995).
[5] G. Brice˜
no, H. Chang, X. Sun, P. G. Schultz, and X.-D.
Xiang, Science 270, 273 (1995).
[6] E. Danielson, J. H. Golden, E. W. McFarland, C. M.
Reaves, W. H. Weinberg, and X. D. Wu, Nature 389,
944 (1997).
[7] E. Danielson, M. Devenney, D. M. Giaquinta, J. H.
Golden, R. C. Haushalter, E. W. McFarland, D. M. Poojary, C. M. Reaves, W. H. Weinberg, and X. D. Wu,
Science 279, 837 (1988).
[8] J. Wang, Y. Yoo, C. Gao, I. Takeuchi, X. Sun, H. Chang,
X.-D. Xiang, and P. G. Schultz, Science 279, 1712 (1998).
[9] M. B. Francis, T. F. Jamison, and E. N. Jacobsen, Curr.
Opin. Chem. Biol. 2, 422 (1998).
[10] T. A. Dickinson and D. R. Walt, Anal. Chem. 69, 3413
(1997).

a

b
Monte Carlo
Select

Parallel Tempering

MC at β1

MC at β2

Screen
Metropolis at β

Swap

FIG. 1. a) One Monte Carlo round with 10 samples. b)
One Parallel Tempering round with 5 samples at β1 and 5
samples at β2 .

4

Max E

Min E
FIG. 2. The Random Phase Volume Model. The model
is shown for the case of three composition variables and one
non-composition variable. The boundaries of the x phases are
evident by the sharp discontinuities in the figure of merit. To
generate this figure, the z variable was held constant. The
boundaries of the z phases are shown as thin dark lines.

Grid
Random
LDS
Monte Carlo
MC Swap
Parallel Tempering

2

X5Z4

X5Z3

X5Z2
X4Z3

X4Z2

X3Z2

X4Z1
X5Z1

X5Z0

X4Z0

X3Z1

1

X3Z0

Relative Figure of Merit

3

Number of Components
FIG. 3. The maximum figure of merit found with different
protocols on systems with different number of composition
(x) and non-composition (z) variables. The results are scaled
to the maximum found by the Grid searching method. Each
value is averaged over scaled results on 10 different instances
of the Random Phase Volume Model with different random
phases. The Monte Carlo methods are especially effective
on the systems with larger number of variables, where the
maximal figures of merit are more difficult to locate.

5

