arXiv:math-ph/0009004v1 4 Sep 2000

Locality and Modular Invariance
in 2D Conformal QFT ∗
K.-H. Rehren
Inst. f. Theor. Physik
Universit¨at G¨ottingen
37073 G¨ottingen
Germany
Dedicated to S. Doplicher and J.E. Roberts.

Abstract
The relations and differences between various classification problems arising in
the context of local two-dimensional (2D) conformal quantum field theory, modular invariants, and subfactors, are discussed. The extent to which locality implies
modular invariance, is exhibited.
AMS Subject classification: 81T40, 46L37 (primary); 81T05 (secondary)

Introduction:
Modular invariants, 2D conformal QFT, and subfactors
One of the great excitements in conformal QFT was the ADE classification of modular
invariant coupling matrices for the SU(2) current algebra [5]. At each level k, this algebra
has only a finite number of covariant representations with positive energy (superselection
sectors), and the partition functions for the conformal Hamiltonian in these sectors span a
linear representation of the modular group SL(2, Z) acting on the temperature parameter.
A modular invariant is a quadratic form (described by the coupling matrix Z) in this space
of partition functions which is invariant under the modular group, and which is subject
to a number of additional constraints. These constraints are necessary for the modular
invariant being interpretable as the partition function of a local 2D conformal QFT with
a unique vacuum vector. This 2D conformal QFT contains the SU(2) current algebra
both as left and right chiral subalgebras.
The fact that SU(2) modular invariants can be classified according to an ADE scheme,
has raised the interest of mathematicians both for its arithmetic appeal, and for its relationship to several other classification problems (for an overview see [27]). As a physicist,
∗

Contributed to “Mathematical Physics in Mathematics and Physics”, Siena, June 20-25, 2000

1

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

2

I want to focus on the quantum field theoretical aspect of this classification problem. I
also want to consider it from a broader perspective, namely as a statement about the
possible position of the embedding of two (left and right) chiral subtheories AL and AR
into a local 2D conformal quantum field theory B. The case of SU(2) is then just a very
special one, and an exact ADE classification cannot be expected to prevail in general.
From this perspective, the classification problem is to find all local 2D conformal
QFT’s which extend the given chiral subtheories AL and AR . These extensions are also
(though not completely) characterized by a coupling matrix Z. The nontrivial requirement
here which imposes constraints on Z, is locality, while modular invariance is a secondary
feature.
Finally, there is a third aspect of modular invariants which is of interest for the classification of subfactors. The embedding of chiral subtheories into a local 2D conformal
QFT gives rise to local subfactors of the form A⊗C ⊂ B which are called canonical tensor
product subfactors [22]. The specific meaning of “canonical” will be explained below, and
is again related to the existence of a coupling matrix. Such subfactors also arise, e.g.,
as generalized quantum doubles or as asymptotic subfactors. A general classification is
not available, but several results on canonical tensor product subfactors will be reported,
which have direct implications with regard to the modular and local QFT classification
problems.
I emphasize that in the local perspective, modular invariance is an additional requirement which is often imposed on the 2D conformal QFT by string theory demands. In
fact, it is not independent from the requirement of locality. Several results below show
that 2D locality “almost” implies modular invariance – but not quite, since there are easy
examples of local 2D extension with a coupling matrix which is not modular invariant.
On the other hand, among the modular invariant coupling matrices for affine Lie algebras
of higher rank, there are some accidental ones, which do not come from any local 2D
conformal QFT (e.g., [25]).
In order to further clarify the relation between locality and modular invariance, we
recall the notion of “statistics characters” introduced in [20] which directly derives from
locality. It provides a pair of matrices X and Y defined in terms of the statistics of a system
of superselection sectors (Sect. 3). X is the diagonal matrix of the statistics phases, while
Y collects the values of the (relative) monodromy operators in a natural tracial state.
Unless there is some degeneracy in the statistics, these matrices yield another unitary
representation of the modular group SL(2, Z) (“statistics representation”, Prop. 3.3). A
priori, this representation is not related to modular transformations of the temperature
parameter of the partition functions for these sectors. (Note also that partition functions
need not even exist a priori as Gibbs functionals.) But at least for affine Lie algebras and
certain related algebras, both representations of the modular group exist, and coincide.
The counter examples mentioned above (local 2D conformal QFT, but not modular
invariant) are due to the possible non-coincidence of the two representations. In many
cases, even if thermodynamic modular invariance fails, the analogous invariance property
with respect to the matrices X and Y still holds true. I propose to call this invariance
property “(degenerate or nondegenerate) statistics symmetry” (Def. 3.4). Nondegenerate

3

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

statistics symmetry is equivalent to modular invariance with respect to the statistics
representation (Prop. 3.5). Useful criteria for statistics symmetry will be provided (e.g.,
the maximal chiral observables within the 2D theory always have it), but there are also
examples of local 2D theories which satisfy not even statistics symmetry, cf. Sect. 3.
I shall not discuss the characterization of solutions to the various classification problems in terms of graphs (such as ADE). Further details on this aspect can be found in
[3, 19, 27].

1

The modular invariants perspective

One considers a rational chiral QFT A and the finite system of its covariant representations
πi with positive energy. The most prominent examples for A are affine Lie algebras
(current algebras), the Virasoro algebra with central charge c < 1, or certain W -algebras
arising in coset constructions. One assumes that the characters χi (β) for each of these
representations exist as Gibbs functionals (i.e., exp −βπi (L0 ) are trace class operators),
and that the characters transform linearly in a unitary representation of the SL(2, Z)
transformations of the complex temperature parameter τ = iβ/2π in the regime Im(τ ) > 0
(and further parameters, if necessary). This assumption is fulfilled for all the examples
mentioned [11].
The unitary matrix representatives for the generating transformations τ → τ + 1
and τ → −1/τ are commonly called T and S, respectively. The square of the latter
transformation is a central involution in SL(2, Z), and unity in P SL(2, Z). Hence C = S 2
commutes with S and T , and C 2 = 1l. The SL(2, Z) relations are thus
T ST ST = S,

CT = T C,

CS = SC = S −1 .

(1.1)

One looks for modular invariant quadratic forms of the form
Z(τ ) =

Zij χi (τ )χj (τ )

(1.2)

ij

with a coupling matrix Z, satisfying
T Z = ZT

and SZ = ZS

(modular invariance).

(1.3)

In addition one postulates that the matrix entries Zij are nonnegative integers, and Z00 =
1 (the label 0 is always reserved for the vacuum sector). These are necessary conditions
0
1
if one wants to interpret Z as a partition function Tr exp(−Re(β)Pconf
− iIm(β)Pconf
)
µ
where Pconf are the conformal Hamiltonian and momentum of a 2D conformal QFT with
a unique vacuum vector. Zij then is the multiplicity of the product of chiral sectors πi ⊗πj
within the vacuum representation of the 2D theory. One considers
The modular classification problem: Find all coupling matrices Z with nonnegative integer entries and Z00 = 1, which commute with the given pair of matrices S and
T (and find out and discard the accidental ones, which do not correspond to a local 2D
theory, see above).

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

4

One finds several types of solutions, which come in pairs because with Z also ZC = CZ
is a solution. There is always the diagonal solution, Z =
i χi ⊗ χi , along with the
conjugate diagonal solution Z = i χi ⊗ χ¯i . All solutions share the “block form”
Z=

χI ⊗ χσ(I)

(1.4)

I

where the “extended characters” χI = i NiI χi unite certain “families” I of sectors, and
σ is some permutation of the families. Among these, there are the orbifold solutions where
sectors i and j belong to the same family if and only if they differ by a simple sector (with
respect to fusion) belonging to some group of simple sectors. Solutions with the identical
permutation are called Type I, those with a nontrivial permutation σ are called Type II.
For the SU(2) affine Lie algebra, it turns out that for all modular invariants, the
nonvanishing diagonal entries Zii = 0 can be identified with the Coxeter exponents of a
Dynkin diagram of type A, D or E [5]. The An diagrams correspond to the diagonal type I
invariants, Dodd to permutation and Deven to orbifold invariants, respectively. E6 and E8
correspond to the exceptional Type I, and E7 to the exceptional Type II invariants. These
ADE invariants exhaust all modular invariants for SU(2). There are similar classifications
for SU(3), but an exact match with Dynkin diagrams cannot be achieved [8].

2

The local QFT perspective

We consider
The local classification problem: Find all local 2D conformal QFT’s which irreducibly extend the given pair of chiral theories A = AL ⊗ AR ,
AL ⊗ AR ⊂ B.

(2.1)

To formalize the problem, I adopt the algebraic framework of QFT; thus a QFT
is given by a net of local von Neumann algebras (factors), say A(I) with I a light ray
interval, or B(O) with O a 2D double-cone, subject to standard axioms including essential
Haag duality. An inclusion like (2.1) is thus always understood as the collection of local
subfactors AL (I) ⊗ AR (J) ⊂ B(O) for all O = I × J.
There is no a priori reason from the local QFT perspective why the left and right
chiral subtheories AL and AR of a 2D conformal QFT B should be isomorphic (parity
symmetric). I prefer to include the “heterotic” (non-symmetric) case in my discussion
from the beginning.
The left and right chiral observables within the 2D conformal theory B must commute
with the respective opposite M¨obius group. It has been shown [21] that all 2D observables
which are invariant under the right M¨obius group, indeed define a chiral subtheory, referred to as the maximal left chiral observables Amax
L . These contain the given subtheory
of left chiral observables AL , and one has the intermediate inclusion
AL ⊗ AR ⊂ Amax
⊗ Amax
⊂ B.
L
R

(2.2)

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

5

Anticipating results below, one finds that the maximal chiral observables coincide
with the “extended observables” in the modular invariants context [16], with respect to
which the coupling matrix turns into a permutation matrix thus giving rise to the block
form (1.4). This fact is due, in view of Prop. 4.1 below, to the following equivalent
characterization of the maximal chiral observables [21].
Proposition 2.1 [21] Let B be a local 2D conformal QFT, and AL , AR chiral subtheories
whose observables generate the left and right M¨obius groups, respectively. For any doublecone region of conformal 2D Minkowski space, O = I × J in light ray coordinates, one
has
′
′
AL (I) ⊂ Amax
(2.3)
L (I) = B(O) ∩ U(GR ) = B(O) ∩ AR (J) .
max
(The corresponding staments hold for R ↔ L.) In particular, Amax
L (I) and AR (J) are
each other’s relative commutants in B(O).

The subalgebras of left and right chiral observables form an algebraic tensor product,
and at least in the cyclic subspace of the vacuum they are also represented as a tensor
product [21]. It is expected that the tensor product is spatial in the full representation of
the 2D theory, and we shall assume this in the sequel.
This means that the vacuum representation of B, as a representation of the subalgebra
AL ⊗ AR decomposes into irreducibles according to the scheme
Zij πiL ⊗ πjR .

π≃

(2.4)

ij

The coupling matrix Z appearing in this decomposition serves as a first (though not
complete) characterization of the extension. Again, Z has nonnegative integer entries,
and Z00 = 1 because of the uniqueness of the vacuum vector, but the labels i and j may
run over different sets (the sectors of AL and of AR ), and Z may be rectangular. Although
a priori the direct sum might be countably or even uncountably infinite, we shall assume
it to be finite throughout.
It follows that the thermodynamical partition function of the 2D conformal QFT, if
it exists, is of the most general form in terms of chiral Gibbs functionals,
Zij χLi (τ )χR
j (τ ),

Z=

(2.5)

ij

with the same coupling matrix Z as in the decomposition (2.4). The notions of “coupling matrix” thus coincide in the modular and in the local interpretation. I emphasize,
however, that coupling matrices associated with local 2D extensions are not necessarily
modular invariant. This issue will be discussed in Sect. 3.
Due to the intermediate inclusion (2.2) the coupling matrix is a product
Z = BLt Z max BR

(2.6)

where Z max is the coupling matrix with respect to the maximal left and right chiral
observables, and the branching matrices BL and BR describe the irreducible decomposition

6

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

of the chiral superselection sectors πImax of Amax upon restriction to A ⊂ Amax . The
restricted representations πImax |A ≃
BIi πi play a role like the families of sectors in eq.
(1.4). This analogy will also be exhibited in Sect. 3.
The question arises by which data of the chiral subtheories, apart from the coupling
matrix, their local 2D extensions can be characterized. (It should be stressed that the
coupling matrix will in general not determine the local extension up to equivalence, although it happens to do so in models with “few” sectors.) An answer has been given in
[14] for the more general problem of characterizing local extensions B of a QFT A in any
dimension.
The local extension B of a quantum field theory A is characterized by its canonical
DHR triple (ρ, w, w1) (assuming the index λ of the local subfactors A(O) ⊂ B(O) to
be finite) [14]. Here, ρ is the DHR endomorphism [6] of A which describes the vacuum
representation of B as a reducible representation of A, and the isometric intertwiners
w : idA → ρ, w1 : ρ → ρ2 in A satisfy the identities of a “Q-system” [13]
1

w ∗ w1 = ρ(w ∗ )w1 = λ− 2 1lA ,
w1 w1 = ρ(w1 )w1 ,
w1 w1∗ = ρ(w1∗ )w1 ,

(2.7)

and the eigenvalue condition for the statistics operator [6] ε(ρ, ρ) ∈ ρ2 (A)′
ε(ρ, ρ)w1 = w1 .

(2.8)

The significance of the operator identities (2.7) and (2.8) has been explained in [23]:
The sector of ρ describes the DHR charges [6] with respect to the subtheory A which
appear in the vacuum representation of B. The isometry w singles out the vacuum
(charge zero) sector within ρ, and w1 is a generating functional for the collection of
3j-symbols (amplitudes of 3-point functions of charge carrying fields). The identities
(2.7) reflect the condition that the corresponding linear combinations of localized vertex
operators (charged field bundle elements [7]) form a * algebra. The eigenvalue condition
(2.8) expresses the condition that these combinations, which constitute the fields of B,
commute at spacelike distance.
The extension B is recovered from the canonical DHR triple as follows [14]. If ρ is
localized in some space-time double-cone O0 , then it restricts to an endomorphism of
the corresponding local algebra, ρ0 ∈ End(A(O0 )), and (ρ0 , w, w1) is a Q-system which
determines the local algebra B(O0 ) extending A(O0 ). With the help of unitary charge
transporters for ρ, the local Q-system (ρ0 , w, w1) can be moved to every Poincar´e or
M¨obius transformed double-cone O = g(O0), giving rise to a coherent net of algebras
B(O) extending A(O). These satisfy local commutativity thanks to (2.8).
We conclude that local extensions of local QFT’s are completely characterized by
canonical DHR triples, that is, solutions (ρ, w, w1) to (2.7) and (2.8) within the category of
DHR endomorphisms and their intertwiners. For rational QFT’s, these operator identities
constitute a finite system of nonlinear algebraic equations which may serve as the basis
of the present classification problem.

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

7

In the 2D case of our interest, A = AL ⊗ AR is a tensor product, and so is its DHR
category. The endomorphism ρ entering the problem is given by eq. (2.4),
Zij αiL ⊗ αjR .

ρ≃

(2.9)

ij

Its specification is equivalent to the specification of the coupling matrix. Thus, the local
classification problem is equivalent to
The local classification problem (algebraic version): Find all canonical DHR
triples for the given pair of chiral theories A = AL ⊗ AR with ρ of the form (2.9).
The local classification problem involves the determination of all admissible coupling
matrices. As was mentioned before and will be discussed in more detail in the next section,
these do not coincide with the modular invariant coupling matrices. Nevertheless, the
question arises whether for any given modular invariant, an associated local 2D conformal
QFT exists, and whether this will be unique. We therefore address also
The existence and uniqueness problem for local 2D conformal QFT: Decide
whether a given coupling matrix Z for AL ⊗ AR (modular invariant or not) arises as the
coupling matrix of a local 2D conformal QFT, and whether the latter is unique.
There is no reason to expect that the uniqueness problem will have a positive answer
in general. It is well known that non-isomorphic subfactors can have the same canonical
endomorphism (hence the same coupling matrix). The eigenvalue condition (2.8) will
presumably not alter the situation very much.
As for the existence problem, some progress has been made. A standard solution of
(2.7) and (2.8) has been given in [14] for the coupling matrix Z = C pertaining to the
parity symmetric case AL ≃ AR , based on Prop. 4.2 below. This means that conjugate
left and right chiral DHR charges can always be combined to yield local 2D fields. The
standard solution exists for any closed (under fusion and conjugation) subsystem of DHR
sectors of A, and thus yields truncated conjugate diagonal coupling matrices which are
typically not modular invariant.
A more general class of possibly heterotic solutions can be obtained from Prop. 4.3
below for all SU(2) and many other modular invariant coupling matrices.

3

On the relation between modular invariance and locality

It is appropriate to discuss the distinction between the local and the modular classification
problem.
First, it is not completely understood in which sense the Gibbs partition functions of
any chiral theory A should transform linearly under the modular group in general when
no Kac-Peterson formula [11] is available. (Higher rank current algebras already exhibit
pairs of conjugate sectors with the same partition function, and this degeneracy has to be
lifted by introducing additional thermodynamic parameters on which the modular group
can act.) The most general result in this direction is due to Nahm [18]. Only the subgroup
generated by T acts in general, which measures the spectrum of L0 modulo integers.

8

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

Second, one should not exclude heterotic models with different left and right chiral
observables, as such models might arise upon passage to “extended chiral algebras” [16],
even if one starts with parity symmetric models. The left and right chiral algebras then
might have different modular transformation matrices, and the requirement of modular
invariance is no longer a commutation property, but an intertwining property:
TL Z = ZTR

and SL Z = ZSR

(heterotic modular invariance).

(3.1)

If we enlarge the framework accordingly, the question arises to which extent modular
invariance of the coupling matrix of a local 2D extension is implied by the properties of
a canonical DHR triple.
The intertwining property for T is easily established. According to the standard
argument, all Wightman fields affiliated with the local 2D theory B must be Bose fields,
hence should have integer difference between left and right chiral scaling dimensions. In
the algebraic framework, this follows from the eigenvalue condition:
Lemma 3.1 Let (ρ, w, w1) be a canonical DHR triple (in any dimension), and σ an
irreducible subsector of ρ. Then σ has statistics phase +1.
Proof: The statistics parameter of ρ [6]
φρ (ε(ρ, ρ)) = r ∗ ρ(ε(ρ, ρ))r = ρ(r ∗ )ε(ρ, ρ)∗ r
can be computed: inserting the isometry r = w1 w : idA → ρ2 , and using (2.8) and (2.7)
yields
φρ (ε(ρ, ρ)) = ρ(w ∗ w1∗ )w1 w = ρ(w ∗ )w1 w1∗w = λ−1 1l = d(ρ)−1 1l.
Since the spectrum of the statistics parameter determines the statistics phases of the
subsectors [6, 7], the claim follows.
Q.E.D.
Corollary 3.2 In the 2D conformal case, with A = AL ⊗ AR , let σ ≺ ρ be of the tensor
product form σL ⊗ σR . Then σL and σR have equal statistics phases. Hence the coupling
matrix intertwines the left and right diagonal matrices X of statistics phases,
XL Z = ZXR .

(3.2)

Proof: Spacelike separation in 2D means positive left separation and negative right separation, or vice versa. Hence the statistics operator of σ is the tensor product of two
opposite chiral statistics operators, and the statistics phase of σ is the quotient of the
chiral statistics phases. From this, the statements are obvious.
Q.E.D.
Now, the chiral statistics phases κ are related to the chiral scaling dimensions h by the
spin-statistics theorem [9], κ = exp 2πih. Thus, the matrices T differ from the matrices
c
X by an overall complex phase exp 2πi 24
depending on the chiral central charges [11].
It follows that the coupling matrix Z intertwines TL and TR up to the quotient of these

9

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

phases. Thus, locality always implies invariance under the modular transformation T up
to a phase which is trivial if the left and right central charges coincide modulo 24.
A statement of comparable generality cannot be obtained for the full modular group.
E.g., the local 2D theory B = AL ⊗ AR has the coupling matrix Zij = δi0 δj0 which is
definitely not modular invariant. But we can obtain nontrivial general results concerning
a symmetry which specializes to modular invariance in favorable cases. As this symmetry
does not refer to Gibbs functionals but to statistics, I call it “statistics symmetry” (Def.
3.4). We shall see that it is always satisfied, as a consequence of locality, for the maximal
chiral observables.
Thus, rather than the thermodynamical transformation matrices T and S, we consider
the statistics phase matrix X (the same as in Cor. 3.2) and the statistics character matrix
Y , defined in [20]. These matrices can be written as
κi κj
Xij = Xji = κi δij
and
Yij = Yji =
Nijk
dk
(3.3)
κk
k
where i, j, k run over all irreducible DHR sectors of the model (in the present case: of the
chiral observables AL or AR ), or over any closed subsystem ∆ thereof. κi and di are the
complex phase and the inverse modulus of the statistics parameter [6, 7] of the sector πi ,
and Nijk are the fusion rules. For a non-exhaustive system ∆, the matrices X and Y are
truncated to those rows and columns of the full matrices which correspond to ∆.
Proposition 3.3 [20] The matrices X and Y satisfy the relations
XY XY X = z Y,

CX = XC,

CY = Y C = Y ∗

(3.4)

where z = i∈∆ κi d2i and C is the charge conjugation matrix. If Y is invertible, a rescaling
of X and Y yields unitary matrices T stat and S stat which satisfy (1.1) and hence generate a
representation (“statistics representation”) of SL(2, Z), turning ∆ into a modular category
[17].
(More specifically, in the nondegenerate case, |z|2 equals the “global index” w =
stat
2
= w −1/2 Y , T stat = (z/|z|)−1/3 X).
i∈∆ di of the system of sectors, and S
It is expected that T stat = T and S stat = S, whenever modular transformation matrices
T and S exist independently. In fact, the first of these coincidences is essentially the spinstatistics theorem [9] which relates the statistics phase determining T stat to the chiral
scaling dimension (“spin”) entering T . The second one is at least empirically true wherever
it has been tested.
That Y is indeed invertible provided ∆ is the system of all DHR sectors, was recently
shown [12] to follow from the split property, and is therefore true whenever the chiral
Gibbs functionals Tr exp −βπi (L0 ) exist for any temperature 1/β > 0.
Let us now turn to the question of statistics symmetry.
Definition 3.4 A local 2D extension satisfies statistics symmetry if
XL Z = ZXR

and

1
1
YL Z =
ZYR
λL
λR

(statistics symmetry).

(3.5)

10

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

The factors λL = i Zi0 d(πiL ) (and likewise λR ) in the Y relation are dictated by
comparison of the 00 components. They equal the indices λ = d(π0max |A ) of the inclusions
max
A ⊂ Amax (because (BR )J0 = δJ0 and ZI0
= δI0 , hence Zi0 = (BL )0i ).
Proposition 3.5 If YL and YR are nondegenerate, statistics symmetry implies
TLstat Z = ZTRstat

and SLstat Z = ZSRstat

(nondegenerate statistics symmetry),

(3.6)

i.e., the coupling matrix is a modular invariant with respect to the left and right statistics
representations of SL(2, Z) (cf. Prop. 3.3).
Proof: The claim is clearly true up to scalar factors. Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5) imply zL /λL =
zR /λR . The complex phase and the modulus of this equality imply that all scalar factors
cancel. (Incidentally, [4, Prop. 3.1] implies that the left and right global indices wL = wR
and the inclusion indices λL = λR coincide separately.)
Q.E.D.
Cor. 3.2 states that the X part of statistics symmetry follows directly from the locality
condition on the 2D extension. Locality also enters the proof of the Y part, but suitable
completeness conditions will be required in addition, cf. Cor. 3.8.
In order to discuss the intertwining relation for Y , we recall from Sect. 2 the product
form of the total coupling matrix
Z = BLt Z max BR ,

(2.6)

AL ⊗ AR ⊂ Amax
⊗ Amax
⊂ B.
L
R

(2.2)

due to the intermediate inclusion

Here Z max is the coupling matrix for the maximal observables, and BL and BR are the
branching matrices. From Prop. 2.1 we know that the maximal chiral observables are
each other’s relative commutants, and in fact are distingushed by this property. Prop. 4.1
below will tell us that the sets of sectors of Amax
and Amax
contributing to the coupling
L
R
max
matrix (2.6) are both closed under fusion, and Z
is a permutation matrix which induces
an isomorphism of the fusion rules, and hence preserves the statistical dimensions. Since
it also respects the statistics phases (Cor. 3.2), it intertwines the left and right statistics
characters Y max as well. In particular, YLmax is invertible if YRmax is, and the coupling
matrix intertwines the ensuing left and right statistics representations.
Corollary 3.6 The coupling matrix of a local 2D conformal QFT with respect to its
maximal chiral observables (or equivalently: every coupling matrix which is a permutation
matrix) satisfies
YLmax Z max = Z max YRmax ,
(3.7)
hence statistics symmetry. If in addition both the left and right chiral statistics is nondegenerate, then the coupling matrix is a modular invariant with respect to the left and right
statistics representations of SL(2, Z).

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

11

In [2] conditions were found that the branching matrices intertwine the matrices Y and
Y max up to a numerical factor This implies that the total coupling matrix Z = BLt Z max BR
also interwines YL with YR , i.e., Z has statistics symmetry:
Proposition 3.7 [2, Lemma 6.3] Consider a local extension (of chiral QFT’s) A ⊂ Amax
with finite index λ. If ∆ is a closed system of DHR sectors of A, then its image α0 (∆)
under ambichiral induction is a closed system of DHR sectors of Amax , and the branching
matrix B intertwines the matrices Y and Y max associated with the systems ∆ and α0 (∆):
1
BY = Y max B.
λ

(3.8)

“Ambichiral induction” is a map between closed systems of DHR endomorphisms,
based on α-induction. The latter is the natural prescription to extend DHR endomorphisms of a subtheory to an ambient theory, giving rise to soliton-type sectors in general.
α-induction was first considered by J. Roberts [24] in a cohomological problem, and its
relevance for the local extension problem was discussed in [14]. Its functorial properties
where first elaborated by Xu [26] and by B¨ockenhauer and Evans [1]. Due to nontrivial
monodromies, there are in fact two prescriptions for α-induction, and ambichiral induction is the intersection of the two sets of irreducible subsectors obtained by applying both
prescriptions to the elements of ∆.
An entry of the branching matrix B is by definition the multiplicity of an irreducible
DHR sector of A in the restriction of an irreducible DHR sector of Amax . By “α-σreciprocity” which holds for local extensions [1], this multiplicity equals the multiplicity
of the DHR sector of Amax in the image of the sector of A under either α-induction. In
particular, every DHR sector of Amax belongs to the ambichiral image of each sector of A
contained in its restriction.
Corollary 3.8 Consider the local 2D extension B with coupling matrices Z and Z max
with respect to the chiral observables AL ⊗ AR and Amax
⊗ Amax
L
R , respectively. Let ∆X and
max
∆X (X = L, R) be the sets of chiral DHR sectors contributing to the respective coupling
matrices. If ∆X are both closed systems, and ∆max
both coincide with the images of ∆X
X
under ambichiral induction (or, equivalently, with the preimage of ∆X under restriction),
then the coupling matrix Z satisfies statistics symmetry.
follows from α-σ-reciprocity and
Proof: The equivalence of the two conditions on ∆max
X
max
the obvious fact that ∆X is the image of ∆X under restriction. According to Prop.
3.7, the branching matrices intertwine the statistics characters for the closed systems of
sectors ∆X and α0 (∆X ), while according to Cor. 3.6, the permutation matrix Z max interand ∆max
twines the statistics characters for the closed systems ∆max
L
R . Thus, under the
stated conditions, Cor. 3.6 and Prop. 3.7 show that the coupling matrix Z = BLt Z max BR
intertwines the statistics characters for ∆L and ∆R with the stated numerical factors.
Q.E.D.
This corollary is the strongest result one may expect for general heterotic theories, as
a generalization of modular invariance implied by 2D locality. However, the conditions on

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

12

the behavior of sectors under induction and restriction in the corollary (in order to apply
the results of [2]) are not always satisfied.
Simple counter examples of perfectly local 2D extensions which violate the assumption
and conclusion of Cor. 3.8 are given by
AL ⊗ AR ⊂ Amax
⊗ Amax
=B
L
R

(3.9)

where the chiral inclusions A ⊂ Amax have subfactor depth larger than 2, such as the
“conformal embedding” SU(2)10 ⊂ Sp(5)1 with partition function
Z = χmax
⊗ χmax
= (χ0 + χ3 ) ⊗ (χ0 + χ3 ).
0
0

(3.10)

Only those sectors of A contribute to the coupling matrix which are contained in the
vacuum sector of Amax , and these do not form a closed system unless the depth is 2.
α-induction on these sectors produces new DHR sectors of Amax which are not contained
in the vacuum representation of B. Completing the systems of chiral sectors ensures the
correct intertwining property for the branching matrices, but the coupling matrix Z max ,
now being a bijection between subsystems of the completed systems, no longer intertwines
YLmax with YRmax for the completed systems.
I do not see, whether the coupling matrix satisfies any sensible intertwining property
weaker than statistics symmetry in complete generality. A possible criterium to exclude
models like the counter examples (3.10), and hopefully to enforce the intertwining property
(3.5), could be that the local 2D theory B does not possess nontrivial superselection
sectors, but I have no proof that this condition indeed has the desired consequences.
Thus, we see that 2D locality comes close to imply the statistics symmetry (Def.
3.4) which generalizes modular invariance to general heterotic models and to models
without proper modular transformation laws for the chiral Gibbs functionals. But counter
examples are easily constructed.
Conversely, as mentioned in the introduction, there are accidental modular invariants
which do not admit a corresponding local 2D extension of the chiral observables. Thus,
we conclude that modular invariance and 2D locality are intimately related while neither
can imply the other without suitable further input.

4

Canonical tensor product subfactors

Solving the operator identities (2.7) within the DHR category of the local net A is
equivalent to finding a Q-system (ρ0 , w, w1) for the local factor A(O0 ) such that ρ0 ∈
Endfin (A(O0 )) is the restriction of some DHR endomorphism of A localized in O0 . The
problem is thus of the type: Find all subfactors A1 of a factor A whose canonical endomorphisms ρ decompose into irreducibles from a given system of sectors of A. In this form
it is mathematically well-posed with any purely infinite factor A and any given system of
sectors ∆ ⊂ Endfin (A). To impose also the eigenvalue condition (2.8), one has to assume
the system of sectors to be braided.
There is no general solution to this problem. But there are some partial results which
relate to the specific tensor product structure. We call a subfactor of the form A ⊗ C ⊂ B

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

13

a canonical tensor product subfactor (CTPS) [22] if its dual canonical endomorphism
ρ ∈ Endfin (A ⊗ C) decomposes into irreducibles as
ρ≃

Zij αi ⊗ γj ,

(4.1)

ij

with αi ∈ End(A) and γj ∈ End(C).
The embeddings AL ⊗ AR ⊂ B of Sect. 3 share this structure. The coupling matrix Z
of a CTPS is again in general rectangular. It has nonnegative integer entries, and Z00 = 1
if and only if the CTPS is irreducible. We shall consider
The subfactor classification problem: Find all irreducible canonical tensor product subfactors A ⊗ C ⊂ B with αi and γj in (4.1) belonging to given systems of sectors
of the given factors A and C, respectively.
We have seen in Sect. 2 that the left and right maximal chiral observables are each
other’s relative commutants within the 2D theory. Therefore, the following general result,
formulated in the broader framework of subfactors, is of interest.
Proposition 4.1 [21] Let A ⊗ C ⊂ B be a CTPS with dual canonical endomorphism as
in (4.1). Then the following are equivalent.
(i) 1l ⊗ C is the relative commutant of A ⊗ 1l in B, and vice versa. (This property is
called “normality”).
(ii) Z0j = δ0j and Zi0 = δi0 .
(iii) The sectors αi of A and the sectors γj of C contributing to (4.1) are both closed
under conjugation and fusion. There is a bijection between them which preserves the
fusion rules, and the coupling matrix is the permutation matrix for this bijection.
It is not clear whether every CTPS A ⊗ C ⊂ B has an intermediate normal CTPS
Aˆ ⊗ Cˆ ⊂ B as in Prop. 4.1. Presumably, this is not the case in general. The results
in [21] on the tensor product position of chiral observables within a 2D conformal QFT,
however, ensure the existence of a unique normal intermediate subfactor, corresponding
to the maximal observables,
AL ⊗ AR ⊂ Amax
⊗ Amax
⊂ B.
L
R

(2.2)

The proposition, when applied to canonical DHR triples, thus splits the local classification problem into two independent parts: classification of chiral local extensions
A ⊂ Amax , and classification of normal canonical DHR triples with Z max an isomorphism
of the fusion rules of Amax
and Amax
L
R .
The proposition also implies that the coupling matrix (2.6) for a local 2D extension is
of block form (1.4) as for modular invariants. (Note that in the heterotic case a distinction
between “Type I” and “Type II” is meaningless.)
The CTPS classification problem can again be formulated algebraically in terms of Qsystems for A ⊗ C satisfying (2.7) with ρ of the form (4.1). We cannot solve this problem
systematically, but there are systematic prescriptions for the construction of Q-systems
for CTPS’s. In this way, the following Props. 4.2 and 4.3 were obtained, which are mainly
relevant for the associated existence problem.

14

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

Proposition 4.2 [14] Let A be a purely infinite factor, and ∆ ⊂ Endfin (A) a finite
closed system of irreducible endomorphisms σ with finite index. Then there is a subfactor
A ⊗ Aopp ⊂ B with dual canonical endomorphism
σ ⊗ σ opp .

ρ≃

(4.2)

σ∈∆

If the system ∆ is braided, then the eigenvalue condition (2.8) is also satisfied.
The result has been generalized to factors of type II and to infinite systems ∆ by
Masuda [15], who also showed that the resulting subfactor is isomorphic to the asymptotic
subfactor associated with the inclusion ρ∆ (A) ⊂ A where ρ∆ is the direct sum of all
αi ∈ ∆. Izumi has shown how to compute the complete structure of these subfactors [10].
The coupling matrix in Prop. 4.2 is the diagonal unit matrix for the system ∆. In chiral
conformal QFT on the circle, Aopp = A(I)opp is naturally isomorphic to A(I)′ = A(I ′ ),
and the latter is M¨obius conjugate to A(I) = A. Under these identifications, the opposite
σ opp of a DHR endomorphism σ belongs to the charge conjugate sector σ
¯ [9]. Hence, in
CQFT eq. (4.2) corresponds to a canonical DHR triple for AL ≃ AR with coupling matrix
Z = C, the charge conjugation matrix.
Applied to the existence problem for a given coupling matrix, or modular invariant,
the proposition thus states that the conjugate diagonal matrix Z = C always corresponds
to a local 2D theory. By choosing irreducible subfactors Aν ⊂ A (ν = 1, 2), one obtains
an abundance of CTPS’s A1 ⊗ Aopp
⊂ B with coupling matrix in block form as with Type
2
I modular invariants. The corresponding families of sectors of Aν (cf. Sect. 1) are the
restrictions of σ ∈ EndDHR (A) to Aν .
The following result is an important generalization, by which local 2D conformal QFT’s
can be associated with numerous other (also Type II) modular invariants.
Proposition 4.3 [22] Let Aν ⊂ M (ν = 1, 2) be two subfactors of finite index, ∆ν ⊂
Endfin (Aν ) two finite closed systems of (inequivalent irreducible) endomorphisms. For a
pair of inductions · (see below) of ∆ν put
Zσ,τ = dim Hom(σ, τ )M

(σ ∈ ∆1 , τ ∈ ∆2 ).

(4.3)

Then there is a CTPS A1 ⊗ Aopp
⊂ B with dual canonical endomorphism
2
Zσ,τ σ ⊗ τ opp .

ρ≃

(4.4)

σ∈∆1 ,τ ∈∆2

(An “induction” · assigns to each σ ∈ ∆ an endomorphism σ ∈ Endfin (M) in a functorial manner: σ extends σ, i.e., σ|A = σ, and intertwiners between products of σi are
intertwiners for products of σi as well, i.e., Hom(σ1 , σ2 σ3 )A ⊂ Hom(σ1 , σ2 σ3 )M .)
If furthermore the systems ∆ν are braided, and the braidings fulfill a naturality condition with respect to Hom(σ, τ )M , then the CTPS also satifies the eigenvalue condition
(2.8).

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

15

Let A1 ≃ A2 be local algebras of chiral observables, ∆1 ≃ ∆2 subsystems of their DHR
endomorphisms, and assume that the dual canonical endomorphisms for the subfactors
Aν ⊂ M are also DHR endomorphisms (these subfactors need not describe local chiral
extensions). Then α-induction (cf. Sect. 3) is applicable to ∆ν , and the assumptions of
Prop. 4.3 are fulfilled with the two opposite prescriptions for α-induction. It was shown
in [4] that the corresponding coupling matrix (4.3) has statistics symmetry. In fact,
many thermodynamical modular invariants can be obtained this way. For these modular
invariants, Prop. 4.3 thus proves the existence of an associated local 2D conformal QFT.
The statement of Prop. 4.3 is, however, not restricted to α-induction, and therefore
produces a larger class of CTPS’s than appearing in 2D conformal QFT. On the other
hand, uniqueness of the subfactors in Props. 4.2 and 4.3 is not claimed. There may well be
inequivalent CTPS’s with the same dual canonical endomorphism, but with inequivalent
Q-systems.

Conclusions
I have discussed the interrelations between several classification problems arising in mathematics and physics with various applications and interpretations: modular invariants,
local 2D conformal QFT, and canonical tensor product subfactors. They all have some
aspects in common (notably a coupling matrix), but the specific requirements imposed
on the coupling matrix depend on the perspective. Progress in any of these classification
problems will have a bearing on the related ones.

Acknowledgments
I thank J. B¨ockenhauer, S. Carpi and A. Ocneanu for numerous discussions, and J. Mund
for a critical reading of the manuscript.

References
[1] B¨ockenhauer, J., Evans, D.E.: Modular invariants, graphs and α-induction for nets of
subfactors. I, Commun. Math. Phys. 197, 361-386 (1998), II, ibid. 200, 57-103 (1999), and
III, ibid. 205, 183-229 (1999).
[2] B¨ockenhauer, J., Evans, D.E.: Modular invariants from subfactors: Type I coupling matrices and intermediate subfactors. math.OA/9911239.
[3] B¨ockenhauer, J., Evans, D.E.: Modular invariants from subfactors. math.OA/0006114.
[4] B¨ockenhauer, J., Evans, D.E., Kawahigashi, Y.: On α-induction, chiral generators and
modular invariants for subfactors. Commun. Math. Phys. 208, 429-487 (1999).
(1)

[5] Cappelli, A., Itzykson, C., Zuber, J.B.: The A-D-E classification of minimal and A1
conformal invariant theories. Commun. Math. Phys. 113, 1-26 (1987).
[6] Doplicher, S., Haag, R., Roberts, J.E.: Local observables and particle statistics. I, Commun.
Math. Phys. 23, 199-230 (1971), and II, ibid. 35, 49-85 (1974).

K.-H. Rehren: Locality and modular invariance

16

[7] Fredenhagen, K., Rehren, K.-H., Schroer, B.: Superselection sectors with braid group statistics and exchange algebras. I, Commun. Math. Phys. 125, 201-226 (1989), and II, Rev.
Math. Phys. SI1 (Special Issue), 113-157 (1992).
[8] Gannon, T.: The classification of SU (3) modular invariants revisited. Ann. Inst. H. Poinc.
65, 15-56 (1996).
[9] Guido, D., Longo, R.: The conformal spin and statistics theorem, Commun. Math. Phys.
181, 11-36 (1996).
[10] Izumi, M.: The structure of sectors associated with the Longo-Rehren inclusions. I, to
appear in Commun. Math. Phys., and II, Kyoto preprint (2000).
[11] Kac, V.G., Peterson, D.H.: Infinite-dimensional Lie algebras, theta functions and modular
forms. Adv. Math. 53, 125-264 (1984).
[12] Kawahigashi, Y., Longo, R., M¨
uger, M.: Multi-interval subfactors and modularity of representations in conformal field theory. math.OA/9903104.
[13] Longo, R.: A duality for Hopf algebras and for subfactors. I, Commun. Math. Phys. 159,
133-150 (1994).
[14] Longo, R., Rehren, K.-H.: Nets of subfactors. Rev. Math. Phys. 7, 567-597 (1995).
[15] Masuda, T.: An analogue of Longo’s canonical endomorphism for bimodule theory and its
application to asymptotic inclusions. Int. J. Math. 8, 249-265 (1997).
[16] Moore, G., Seiberg, N.: Naturality in conformal field theory. Nucl. Phys. B313, 16-40
(1989).
[17] M¨
uger, M.: Conformal field theory and Doplicher Roberts reconstruction. Contribution to
this conference, math-ph/0008027.
[18] Nahm, W.: A proof of modular invariance. Int. J. Mod. Phys. A6, 2837-2845 (1991).
[19] Ocneanu, A.: Contribution to this conference.
[20] Rehren, K.-H.: Braid group statistics and their superselection rules. In: The Algebraic
Theory of Superselection Sectors, D. Kastler (ed.). World Scientific, Singapore 1990, pp.
333-355.
[21] Rehren, K.-H.: Chiral observables and modular invariants. Commun. Math. Phys. 208,
689-712 (2000).
[22] Rehren, K.-H.: Canonical tensor product subfactors. Commun. Math. Phys. 211, 395-406
(2000).
[23] Rehren, K.-H., Stanev, Ya.S., Todorov, I.T.: Characterizing invariants for local extensions
of current algebras. Commun. Math. Phys. 174, 605-633 (1996).
[24] Roberts, J.E.: Local cohomology and superselection structure. Commun. Math. Phys. 51,
107-119 (1976).
[25] Schellekens, A.N., Yankielowicz, S.: Field identification fix points in the coset construction.
Nucl. Phys. B334, 67-102 (1990).
[26] Xu, F.: New braided endomorphisms from conformal inclusions. Commun. Math. Phys.
192, 349-403 (1998).
[27] Zuber, J.-B.: CFT, BCFT, ADE and all that. hep-th/0006151.

